# RB 256

Malew Parish Church, Great Meadow IM9 4EB

## Parish
Malew

## Registration date
08/04/2008

## Extracted details
* Builders: William Gill
* Reasons for registration:
  - special architectural and historic interest
  - Georgian pews and panelling
  - oldest modern stained glass in the Island
  - burial place of Illiam Dhone
  - connections with significant Manx families
  - wooden carving of the Three Legs of Man
  - ancient nave


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1352400/0500256regbld-malew-church-reduced.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 07/00256/REGBLD
Isle of Man
Government
Retléys Eflan Vawnin
DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 7th April 2008, the Department of Local
Government and the Environment, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Malew Church Great Meadow Castletown Isle Of Man IM9 4EB
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Canmites. wy eee ou“ ee ee |
Dated this 8th April 2008,
By Order of the Department
Pma(@o~s
E J Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shail serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial Beriod, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
To: Property Owner — FILE COPY
Commissioners New Offices, Main Road, Ballasalla, IM9 2RQ,
Director, Manx National Heritage
icay» Wavdens d Matew
SPatiament Squave
Castefawn.

Department of Local Government
and the Environment
Directorate of Planning and Building Control
aol ee | Malew House
~ Cla
= cas
432493
432813 432813
Cemetery
| Malew Church F
I lalew Churc! we
Stone
Skibrick Hill
43406834062
43288828.
1:2500
Km 0.05 it 0.15 0.2
JRgf Base Map reproduced from the Isle of Man Survey mapping, Comments 07/00256/REGBLD
Is dey licence number GD000/97. © Crown Copyright, Department
“ih of Local Government and the Environment, Isle of Man. D i
~ . ate
Reproduction prohibited without prior permission. 08 April 2008
CE iPS Produced using Uniform 7.3 at DLGE, Murray House, Mount Havelock, Douglas, M1 2SF

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: | Malew Parish Church
ADDRESS: Malew Road, Castletown
POST CODE: IM9 4EB
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Malew Parish Commissioners
GRID REF: 263 694
Introduction
The name Malew is derived from either one of two saints, or a combination of the two.
The church is believed to have been originally dedicated to St. Lua or Molua, a Celtic
saint who also gave his name to Killaloe in Ireland. However, the Roman church is
said to have objected strongly to Irish Saints who did not appear in their calendar and
from the beginning of the fifteenth century the church was dedicated to St. Lupus, the
fifth century Bishop of Troyes in France (Manx Place-names, 1925).
The parish itself is named after the church. Malew is the largest parish in the
sheading of Rushen and it contains many important historical and architectural sites
including the once great monastery at Rushen Abbey. Castletown, the former capital
was located in Malew Parish until 1921 when it achieved parochial status in ifs own
right and the town is home to Castle Rushen, an ancient fortress dating back to Norse
.times.
The largest village in the parish is Ballasalla, a settlement which grew up around
Rushen Abbey and the monks from the abbey owned much land in the parish. The
plain south of the church is known as ‘Great Meadow’ as this area was the meadow
which belonged to the monks of the abbey.
The locality of the church is unusual as it is not situated within a village or a hamlet,
but it is positioned along Malew Road which runs from ‘Cross Four Ways’ to Castletown
and with the exception of a small number of sparsely sited buildings, the church is
surrounded by countryside. The road is diverted around the churchyard and up until
the end of the seventeenth century this was the only route to and from Castletown
from the north. |
Malew is the largest of the ancient parish churches and its historical importance is
reflected with the tradition that every new Bishop preaches his first sermon on the
Island at Malew.
'The church is mainly noted for being the burial place of William Christian (Illiam
Dhone), and also for the selection of memorials (many of which are dedicated to the
Goldie-Taubman family from the Nunnery near Douglas), the stained glass windows,
the Georgian pews and the survival of some early church furniture.

History
Nearby Historical Sites
There are many ancient sites in the parish and in the immediate locality there is a
prehistoric stone monument on Skibrick Hill directly to the west of the church which
has been dated to 800-500 BC. The church itself is on a raised site, believed to have
been the location of an ancient keeil, built by a Christian missionary. The Christian
missionaries are thought to have first arrived on the Island around 500 AD, coming
from other Celtic nations but largely from Ireland. Kirk Maughold Church is another
parish church which was also built on the site of an ancient keeil (source; Manx
National Heritage website). |
Malew Parish Church
It is not known exactly when the church was built. However, the Isle of Man was
divided into Parishes in the twelfth century and it is thought that the oldest parts of
the building date from that time or earlier.
Historically, Malew church was one of the most important churches on the Island.
This is due to the fact that until 1921 it was the parish church of Castletown, which
was the Island’s capital from the thirteenth century until 1874 and much of the
population of the town were buried in the church graveyard. In addition to this,
Malew church was located on the only route into Castletown which would have been
taken by anybody travelling to or from Peel Castle in the west, or northwards to
Bishopscourt near Kirk Michael, or the Archdeacon’s residence in Andreas.
One of the main streets in Castletown is Malew Street (formerly known as ‘Church
Street’), which leads away from Castle Rushen and connects with Malew Road, which
the Parish Church is located on. Malew Road leads to the gateway of the churchyard
known as ‘Castletown Gate’ and the road is then diverted around the churchyard and
continues up to Cross Four Ways and beyond.
The parish registers date back to 1649 and the list of known vicars dates back to
1368, the earliest name on the list was John Hugh. |
The Churchyard
The oldest part of the churchyard is that immediately surrounding the church and it
has been suggested that this was roughly an oval shape (Kewley, 2004). The earliest
graves would have had no headstones and the earliest headstones which have
survived date from the early eighteenth century. “Originally, graves were reused once
the memory of a previous burial had faded, but with the introduction of headstones,
this was no longer possible, and so the churchyard eventually ran out of room.”
(Kewley, 2004, p. 23 & 24).
The graveyard was first extended in 1827 and the larger site reached the Castletown
Gate to the south, a large extension was made to the north in 1865 on what was then
the glebe lands but by the 1890's this area had ran out of room and in 1895 an
extension was made to the west of the church alongside Skibrick Hill. In 1935 a large
area across the road became a new part of the graveyard and this site is still in use
today.

There is a private walled burial yard with a central obelisk which belongs to the Moore
family of Billown, the same family also own the Billown Gallery within the church.
The Vicarage
From the churchyard on the north side of the church you can see the old Vicarage
which was originally built by William Gill, the vicar from 1830 to 1872. The church
sold this Vicarage approximately thirty years ago. Since then it has since been
extensively altered and is now known as ‘Malew House’.
Iiliam Dhone b,1608, d.1663
Illiam Dhone was a Manx martyr who was executed for treason at Hango Hill on
January 2TM 1663 and the day after his death he was buried in the chancel of Malew
church, although the exact spot of his burial is not Known. An entry in the parish
register of Malew states that “...he died most penitently and most curragiously, made
a good end, preyed earnestly, made a good speech, and the next day was buried in
the chancel of Kirk Malew.” .
It is believed that some of the plotting of the Manx Rebellion took place in Malew
church and that the vicar of that time, Sir Thomas Parr was also involved, although in
a statement he denied all knowledge of the rising. -
A new memorial to Illiam Dhone was unveiled in Malew church on January 2" 2006 by
the Friends of the Church. The memorial is a bust of Dhone designed by Bryan Kneale
R.A. and it is situated on the wall in the chancel. A plaque underneath the sculpture
states .'Here lies. Iiam Dhone, William. Christian. of Ronaldsway.... Shot to death
at
Hango Hill, 2°" January 1663’.
Reverend William Gill b.1797, d.1872
William Gill was one of the most outstanding clergymen in the Isle of Man in the
nineteenth century. He was appointed Vicar of Malew on 7 September 1830 and
remained in the post until his death in 1872. There was no vicarage at the time of his
appointment and the Rev. Gill noted that the glebe lands were boggy so he had them
drained and raised £500 for the building of a new vicarage on this site, near to the
church. In addition to this, he was responsible for the rebuilding of the parish
schoolhouse, He was devoted to his parish and carried out various alterations to the
church, some more controversial than others, “He put a stained glass east window in
Malew church, and several people ceased to attend, considering this a step towards
Rome.” (Gelling C.J., 1998, p.73).
Architecture
Malew parish church has remained largely unaltered from when it was first constructed
and its traditional vernacular style is similar to other original parish churches which still
exist, such as Marown Old Church, Lonan Old Church and Maughold.

The Nave (unknown date)
The nave (central area where the bulk of the congregation sit) is the oldest part of the
building. The walls of the nave are very thick and the western elevation leans
outwards, as it is likely to have done for centuries. It was suggested by Rev J. Quine
at the turn of the twentieth century that the nave of Malew church could be 1,000
years old, which would mean that it pre-dates the formation of the parishes in the
twelfth century. The church is believed to have been built on an ancient Christian site
(a keeil), and if that is the case then it is probable that there was already a church
here and that the building was later designated as the parish church in the twelfth
century. Despite the fabric of the walls being of a significant age, there have been
many alterations in the subsequent years, for example the window openings are
eighteenth century with curved tops and no trace of the originals survives.
The nave is reached through entering the door in the western elevation. This door is
now the main entrance to the church but years ago the main entrance was located on
the south elevation and the door on the west elevation would have only been used
only by the person(s) ringing the bells. The church has two bells; an old bell was
donated by William Earl of Derby in 1677.
The Chancel (1780)
In the late eighteenth century the original chancel (area around the altar) had fallen
into disrepair, so it was demolished and rebuilt in 1780. However, it is not known if
the length of the eighteenth century chancel is the same as the original (Kewley,
2004). Around the turn of the twentieth century, Rev. J. Quine wrote reports about
the ancient Manx parish churches for the Yn Lioar Manninagh (now the Isle of Man
Natural History and Antiquarian Society), in which he stated that “...the existing nave
of Malew is probably 1,000 years old. Malew church was an ancient building when
Malew became a parish, and this church was made the parish church.” (Yn Lioar
Manninagh, vol. iii, pp. 331/7). Rev. Quine also measured the size of the ancient
parish churches and discovered the nave of Malew church to be approximately 55ft by
18ft, which he believed to be the standard size for old Manx churches. In comparison
to Malew, Lonan Old Church was 54ft by 18, Andreas (old church) was 53 by 18, Bride
(old church) 54 by 16 and Maughold 71 by 17, although Maughold was believed to
have originally been about 50 by 17, prior to being extended westwards. This
evidence from Rev. J. Quine would seem to suggest that the nave of Malew was the
old church and the chancel was a later addition. If the chancel was a rebuild of an
earlier structure, then it is likely to have replaced a chancel which was not of the same
age as the nave.
The walls of the chancel are notably narrower than those of the nave and this can be
seen clearly on the exterior of the church where the outer wall juts in where the
chancel joins the main body of the church. In the interior of the church there are
wooden panelled window reveals which are two panels thick in the nave and only one
panel thick in the chancel.
The chancel is used for seating and the private box pews have always been reserved
for the most important estates in the parish, with two remaining in regular use to this
day, those of Ballahott and Great Meadow.

The North Wing (1782)
The most important families in the parish had box pews within the chancel and the
various farms in the parish had seats in the nave, this meant there were many wealthy
members of the congregation from Castletown who did not own or rent farms in the
parish and were therefore unhappy because this meant they had to sit in the gallery
with the lower orders. As a result of this, the north wing was constructed in 1782, at
the expense of these wealthy members of the parish who were also to pay for its
maintenance. The wing was built on the north side rather than the south so there
would be fewer graves disturbed and it was built onto the side of the church rather
than extending on the west end so that the people using it could hear the service
better, the idea that all of the congregation should be able to see the altar is a
Victorian concept. The floor rises in the wing, allowing people at the back to see over
the heads of those in front
West Gallery (C18th) and the Billown Gallery (1818)
When viewed from the interior of the church, the first floor window on the west
elevation clearly used to be a doorway. It is thought that there was originally a series
of steps on the outside of the church leading up to this first floor door, as can still be
seen at Marown Old Church. These steps would have given access to the first floor
west gallery, which was added in the eighteenth century in order to accommodate the
growing population. The present steps to the first floor galleries weren’t thought to
have been constructed until the private Billown Gallery was added in 1818, at the
expense of Mr Thomas Moore of Billown and Great Meadow (the gallery remains in the
ownership of the Moore family to this day). It has been suggested by J.D.R. Kewley
that the present steps would have been constructed in order that the Moore family did
_ not have to walk through the west galleryto get to their seats and the exterior steps
would have been taken down and replaced with the door on the ground floor which
was to be used by the bell ringers. The organ was located in the west gallery until it
moved to its present position on the south wall in 1897, blocking up the doorway
which had been the main entrance to the church, this resulted in the creation of a new
south door in-between the organ and the pulpit.
Pews and Panelling
The majority of the interior is Georgian. There is panelling on the walls throughout
the church up to dado level and this matches the pews and the window reveals. In
the north wing the pews and panelling are the originals dating from 1782. These
pews are made of deal which has been grained in order to resemble oak (Kewley
J.D.R., 2004). The pews in the north wing were copied in the rest of the church, so
the interior is largely Georgian. In the nave the pews are forward-facing and in the
chancel there are box pews which are irregular shapes and some have seating on
three sides.
When the previous organ was installed in 1897, choir stalls were built beside the
organ, reusing wood from the pews which had been there previously. The present
pulpit, vicar stall and curate stall are located at the crossing where the nave, chancel
and north wing meet. They are Victorian additions and they replaced an older
Georgian three decker pulpit, an example of which can be seen at Braddan Old
Church. The lectern is in memory of Illiam Dhone.

The Georgian box pews in the chancel had originally continued right up to the east
wall but these were destroyed in 1962 and the modern panelling and altar rails were
installed which are unfortunately not in keeping with the rest of the church.
Church furniture
There are three ancient stone crosses which are located within the church next to the
window in the west gallery. The crosses are by far the oldest articles in the church
and they date from the late tenth or early eleventh century.
Malew church is known for the survival of early religious artefacts which pre-date the
sixteenth century reformation. These items include a twelfth century bronze crucifix
(a copy of which is located on the wall next to the pulpit), an early fifteenth century
silver paten, a portion of a staff covered with brass and an unidentified bronze article,
both of which may be as early as the fourteenth century. These items have been
removed from the church for their safe keeping.
The font is located in the nave near to the main entrance. It has been moved around
the church in the past depending on where the: main entrance was located, taking its
present position after the First World War. The font is carved from granite, perhaps
from Granite or Stoney Mountain within Malew Parish and it could date from the
formation of the parish in the twelfth century, although the pillar and base on which it
stands may well be much later.
The timber panelling which divides the baptistery from the vestry was inserted when
the vestry was created in the early twentieth century. This panelling was built with
reused timber and there are still sketches of ships on it, frorn its previous use.
The organ is located on the south wall, directly opposite the north wing and adjacent
to the south entrance door. The organ was originally located in the west gallery and
the former main entrance to the church was where the organ now is, but when this
doorway was blocked in 1897, the organ was moved to this position. The organ was
moved to the chapel of ease at St Mark’s in 1907 and the present organ dates from
that time. It was built by Moses Morgan, the Douglas organ builder, and it was given
in memory of Edith, the wife of Mr T.H. Moore of Billown.
Early sixteenth century wooden carving and the Stanley family
In the area around the font there isa wooden carving attached to the timber panelling
which separates the baptistery from the vestry. The carving is believed to date from
c.1500 (Kewley J.D.R., 2004) and is more than likely connected with the Stanley family
who first became Lords of Man in 1405 and ruled for 360 years. The emblem on the
right of the carving is an early representation of the Three Legs of Man and that on
the left is of a bird’s foot. Kewley (2004) suggests that the carving may have
originally been part of a rood screen (a partition which divided the chancel of a church
from the nave, most of which were destroyed by the Victorians). There is no mention
of a rood screen at Malew Church but it is thought likely that there would have been
one originally; it may have been destroyed by the Victorians or earlier when the
chancel was rebuilt in 1780.
The Three Legs of Man is thought to have its origins in the thirteenth century. The
earliest representations showed the legs running clockwise, such as on the fourteenth

~ century Maughold pillar cross. The three legs on this old wooden carving at Malew
Church are a rare example as they run in an anti-clockwise direction. In addition to
this, the knees are bent at a much greater angle than usual and the legs have spurs at
the ankles, a feature believed to have been introduced in the fifteenth century (Manx
Note Book). This carving of the Three Legs of Man is almost identical in design to
other carvings found in Manchester Cathedral which commemorate members of the
Stanley family.
The bird’s foot is likely to be an eagle’s claw which was the crest of Lord Monteagle, a
title which was initially awarded to Edward Stanley, a member of the Stanley family, in
1515. The Stanley family crest was originally three stags heads but it was changed to
the eagle and child crest following their union with the Lathom family in 1385 (Manx
National Heritage), with an eagle’s claw adopted as the Monteagle and Stanley crest.
Edward Stanley (son of Thomas Stanley, the first Earl of Derby) was: the first Lord
Monteagle. He died in 1523 and was buried at St. Margaret’s Church in Hornby, a
church which he had built. On the outer wall of Hornby church tower there is a plaque
displaying the Three Legs of Man, in addition to this, in the chancel there is the badge
of Lord Monteagle, the eagle’s claw and the three legs.
Edward’s brother was James Stanley, the Bishop of Ely. James Stanley died in 1514 or
1515 and he was buried in the Stanley or Ely Chapel in Manchester Cathedral. The
Chapel in the Cathedral contains crests to various members of the Stanley family and
many of these carvings include the Three Legs of Man. As was previously mentioned,
the design, rotation and angle of these emblems are almost identical to that found on
this carving in Malew church, dating it to the early sixteenth century, a date which has
been previously suggested by Kewley (2004).
Windows
Most old Manx churches originally had no windows on the north elevation and Malew
church would have been no exception, the windows on the north elevation being
added at a later date. In addition to this, old Manx churches would have had plain
glass windows, as can be seen at Old Braddan Church to this day. Stained glass was
not introduced at Malew Church until c.1843 when it was inserted into the altar
window on the instruction of the Reverend William Gill (vicar from 1830 to his death in
1872). This was badly received by some members of the congregation and it was
noted that "...several people ceased to attend, considering this a step towards Rome.”
(Gelling C.J., 1998, p.73). The altar window is believed to be the first modern stained
glass on the Island. It is by William Wailes of Newcastle and was restored in 2006 by
Alan Moston. Following the introduction of stained glass, the old plain glass was
gradually replaced and now with the exception of the first floor west window and the
window in the vestry, all of the windows are stained glass, with the majority of which
dating from the nineteenth century. The insertion has certainly altered the
appearance of the church and the reduction of light has resulted in the addition of the
rooflights which date from the re-roofing of 1929.
The original window openings were altered in the eighteenth century and these still
remain. They are typical Georgian round-headed church windows with wooden
panelling in the reveals and all traces of the originals have gone. They may have
originally been narrow and gothic in style, similar to the window rediscovered at
Maughold church.

The War Memorial window dates from 1922 and it is the first window on the right as
you enter the church through the bell door. There are bronze panels at either side of
the window which list the names of the men in the parish who died in the First World
War.
Memorials
There are many memorials in the interior of the church, the majority of which are
marble and some are of notable merit, leading Malew to be called the ‘Westminster
Abbey of the Island’. The most significant is that of Illiam Dhone who was buried in
the chancel in 1663. There are also memorials to prominent Island families such as
the Taubman’s (later Goldie-Taubman’s), from the Bowling Green in Castletown. The
family later moved to the Nunnery in Douglas but continued to be buried at Malew.
There are some memorials which are said to have been removed from the old chancel
and re-installed when it was rebuilt in 1780. One of these is an illegible stone in the
wall to the left of the altar which is a memorial to Elinor Staffarton who died in 1578.
She was the daughter of Robert Corwyn of Cumberland and wife to Henry Staffarton,
the receiver of Castle Rushen. This is believed to be the oldest date of any known
tomb in the Island (John Feltham’s Tour, 1797 and 1798).
There is a memorial on the south wall to a Julius Caesar from Ballahick in the east of
the parish. At first sight the surround to the monument appears to be marble, but
closer inspection reveals it has been painted to resemble marble.
Re-roofing
The church was re-roofed in 1929 when it was given the present skylights, which were
added in order to improve lighting in the church after the introduction of stained-glass
had made it dark. This re-roofing discovered an old beam, with the date inscribed
‘1688’, an indication of the date of an earlier roof. This beam has been preserved in
the church and can be seen on the wall behind the Billown gallery.
RECOMMENDATION
Malew Parish Church and church yard boundary wall as indicated in red on the
attached plan; are suggested for inclusion on the Protected Buildings Register for the
following reasons;
Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
The pews and panelling are Georgian and they have survived the Victorian period
which saw the alteration of many of the old Manx churches. Malew church is said to
be “What all the old Manx churches were like before Victorian restoration; outside a
white-washed rectangle in fields; inside box-pews and Georgian fittings. North
transept 18°" century.” (Manx Note Book).
The altar window dates from 1843 and it is believed to be the oldest modern stained
glass in the Island.

Close Historic Association
The church is the burial place of the famous Manx martyr, Illiam Dhone. He was
arrested for treason, shot at Hango Hill in Castletown on January 2"? 1663 and buried
in the chancel of Malew church the next day. Some of the plotting of the rebellion is
believed to have taken place within the church, with the co-operation of the vicar, Sir
Thomas Parr,
There are connections with significant Manx families such as the Goldie-Taubman’s of
the Nunnery, Douglas (formerly of the Bowling Green, Castletown) who have many
memorials within the church. The Moore family of Billown and Great Meadow paid for
the construction of the Billown Gallery and they also own a private burial ground
within the church grounds, .
There is a wooden carving dating from c.1500 which shows the Three Legs of Man
and the eagle’s claw crest of Lord Monteagle of the Stanley family. The Stanley’s
_ became Lord’s of Man in 1405 and ruled for 360 years.
Age and Rarity
The oldest part of the church is the nave. The nave is believed to be ancient in its age
and it has been suggested that it could be over 1,000 years old, pre-dating the
formation of the parishes in the twelfth century and making it possibly the oldest
parish church on the Island.

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
Books
Dearden S. and Hassell K., 1997, The Isle of Man, a Postcard Tour. Volume Three,
The South.
Gelling C.J., 1998, A History of the Manx Church 1698-1911.
Articles
Kewley J.D.R., 2004, A Short Guide to Malew Church.
Maps and Plans
Wood's Atlas, 1867, DoLGE.
Ordnance Survey Map, 1869, DoLGE.
Current digital map, DoLGE.
Photographs
Current photographs.
Internet Sites
Manx Note Book
www.isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook
Information about the parish of Malew.
Manx Place Names, 1925 — Parish of Kirk Malew.
Notes from the parish registers; Manx Note Book, vol. ji, 1886.
Information about Malew Church.
Memorials of God’s Acre ~ Kirk Malew; Manx Society, vol., xiv.
List of Vicars; Manx Society, vol. xxix.
John Feltham’s Tour of the Isle of Man in 1797 and 1798 — Kirk Malew
Notes on Manx Parish Church Sites; Yn Lioar Manninagh (now IOMNH&AS),
vol. fil, pp.331/5.
Notes on the Form of the Ancient Parish Church in Man; Yn Lioar Manninagh
(now IOMNH8&AS), vol. iii, pp.337/9.
Information about Marown Church.
Church furniture in Malew Church; Manx Society, vol. xv.
The church organ.
Vicar Thomas Parr ~ statement denying knowledge of the Manx Rising, 1662.
William Gill — information.
® © &@€ 6 € @ @ 6
® © @ @ @
10

e Stanley Arms on Stalls in Manchester Cathedral; extracted from Lancashire and
Cheshire Antiquarian Society, vol. 35, 1917.
e Example of three legs and eagle's claw from mantelpiece in house in
Somersham.
Current photographs
www. manxscenes.com ; |
e View of the church from the south side.
e Stained glass window.
e Sculpture of Illiarm Dhone.
Manx National Heritage
www.gov.im/mnh
e Early Christianity in Mann.
e Castle Rushen — Wall Hangings.
Information on Malew Parish — origin of the name
www,dqualtrough.org/grass-roots6.
htm
Information on Illiam Dhone
www.mcb.net/manxmen/dhone.htm!
Isle of Man Government
www.gov.im /isleofman/facts.xml
e Island Facts - Origins of the Three Legs of Man crest.
Information on the Stanley family and Lord Monteagle
.. www. tudorplace.com.ar/Bios/EdwardStanley(1BMounteagle).htm
www.tudorplace.com.ar/Bios/JamesStanley(BishopofEly).htm
www.wiganworld.co.uk/stuff/contrib1 .php?opt=contrib&rr=b
www. lancslinks.org.uk/linkscontent/mycommunity/localcommunity/lancaster/hornby/hi
story.asp
11

jurisdiction code
Malew Commissioners
location
26846945
ownership
origin !
ae
4,
ae
POR (a
EO
<<
oNrE
BANAL
Dy:
IES
PAT
SOG
on
description St. Lupus ’ Church 9
recommendation










4,
pS)
ee)
eZ
rm
<<
a
```
