# RB 254

Government House

## Parish
Onchan

## Registration date
02/05/2018

## Extracted details
* Architects: Gustavus Hamilton, James Cowle, Willink and Thicknesse
* Builders: James Cowle
* Reasons for registration:
  - Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
  - Historic Interest
  - Close Historic Association


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1361444/0700254regbld-pdf-for-website-amended-120220.pdf

## OCR
```
Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control Directorate, Murray House, 
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email planning@gov.im 
Form RB2 
Registered Building No.  07/00254/REGBLD 
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, FOOD AND 
AGRICULTURE 
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999 
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (REGISTERED BUILDINGS) 
REGULATIONS 2013 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the 2nd May 2018 the Department of Environment, 
Food and Agriculture, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and 
Regulations has determined that 
Government House Onchan Isle Of Man IM3 1RR  
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, should be 
entered onto its PROTECTED BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special 
architectural and historic interest. 
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or 
demolition of the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in 
compliance with an obligation imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the 
prior written consent of the Planning Authority. 
Dated this 10th May 2018, 
By Order of the Department 
Mrs C Dudley  
For the Director of Planning 
and Building Control 

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control Directorate, Murray House, Mount 
Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email planning@gov.im 
NOTE 
: 
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999; 
Schedule 2 
The Protected Buildings Register 
Notifications of entries on register etc. 
2 (1) As soon as may be (practical) after a building has been entered in the register, or the 
register has been amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a 
notice on the owner and the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or 
removed from the register. 
(2)
The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building
which has been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building
from the register-
(a)
within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b)
after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013 
5.
Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1)
The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2)
The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
Notices sent to: 
Property Owner  
Local Authority - ONCHAN, Onchan Commisioners Office, Main Road, Onchan, 
Director, Manx National Heritage  
Isle Of Man Natural History & Antiquarian Society 

Bigal man Ponsa orn
AS _07/00254/REGBLD e
[Department |PRBC
2 Division/Office_|DEFA
ry [Case Reference |Governmen tHouse, Onchan
Scatebar: Cum? —mmmm2? Date [28/03/2018
Scale: 1:781 Pepe ee neton reprucson eign torn CoPye on nay leas pees orcadmech

1 
REGISTERED BUILDING 
NAME: 
Government House 
ADDRESS: 
Government Road, Onchan 
POST CODE: 
IM3 1RR 
LOCAL AUTHORITY: 
Onchan District Commissioners 
GRID REF: 
391 781 
Introduction 
Government House has been the official residence of the Lieutenant Governor of the 
Isle of Man since 1863.  The property also provides accommodation for the Island’s 
formal guests and is used for functions and social gatherings. 
Historically, the estate was known as ‘Bemahague’, which was one of the old principal 
quarterlands of the Island.  It was part of the treen of Tremsare in the parish of 
Onchan and it was farmed by a branch of the Christian family from about 1600 until 
the late eighteenth century.  Subsequent owners of the estate were the Heywood 
family and their descendants the Daley’s, who finally sold the property to Tynwald in 
1903. 
Over the years, Government House has been updated and remodelled at various times 
whilst also accommodating the changing tastes and needs of successive Governors 
and their Ladies. 
History 
The name ‘Bemahague’ has a combination of both Gaelic and Norse elements, which 
possibly means that the estate pre-dates the early Norse settlements of the ninth 
century.  The prefix ‘Be’ is derived from the Norse ‘By’, which is found in a great 
number of Manx place names and means a large farm or estate.  The remainder of the 
name is Gaelic and is from ‘Mac Thaidhg’, meaning ‘Son of Taig’.  The Taig family are 
believed to have been the original holders of the estate and the old name of ‘Taig’ has 
been altered into the modern ‘Keig’. 
Long in the possession of a branch of the prominent Onchan family of Christian, the 
earliest mention of it is in the manorial Roll of 1511, where Edmund McCorkell is 
shown as holding it and paying a Lords rent. By 1600 the estate was held by a branch 
of the Christian family.  The Christian’s lived and farmed at Bemahague until 1789 
when Edward Christian was forced to sell the property in order to redeem a mortgage.  
The bulk of estate was sold for £1,000 to Robert Heywood (b.1740, d.1809) who was 
a wealthy Douglas merchant and Water-Bailiff.  Edward Christian had retained the 
mansion house along with other houses and outbuildings, but following his death less 
than a year later, these were also sold to Robert Heywood for a further £720. 

2 
The Heywood’s were a prominent family in the Isle of Man during this time and 
Deemster Peter Heywood, a brother of Robert Heywood lived at the nearby property 
Glencrutchery House in the adjacent quarterland of that name.  Robert Heywood was 
the uncle of Peter Heywood, who was the midshipman on H.M.S. Bounty.  During 
these years, one of the best-known personalities to have lived at Bemahague was 
Peter’s sister, Nessy Heywood.  She died young at the age of 24, but her heroic efforts 
in order to clear the good name of her brother Peter when he was accused of 
involvement in Mutiny on the Bounty (in 1789) by Captain William Bligh, have made 
her a heroine of Manx history. 
The owner Robert Heywood never occupied Bemahague himself, but instead he let the 
property to various tenants until his death in 1809, when it passed to his son, 
Deemster John Joseph Heywood.  Governor’s Bridge, which is near to Government 
House was originally known as ‘Heywood’s’ or the ‘Deemster’s Bridge’ after Deemster 
J.J. Heywood.  The bridge gained its present name in 1920 when it was first included 
in the T.T. course. 
Deemster Heywood let the property to an English gentleman called Joshua Farrer who 
was a friend of the Earl of Sandwich.  During the period of his tenancy, Joshua Farrer 
undertook a considerable amount of rebuilding works to the property which took on 
the Regency style and completely altered its appearance. 
In a guide to the Isle of Man dating from 1836, titled ‘A Six Day’s Tour, By a Stranger’, 
Bemahague was said to be “…charmingly situated, commanding a fine view of the 
whole bay: the old house should be taken down, and a new one built in the abbey 
style; the situation deserves a good mansion”.  A number of reports on Government 
House have said the property was rebuilt between 1820 and 1830; however this 
comment about the “old house” could suggest that in 1836 the old Christian family 
farmhouse still stood on the site and that Joshua Farrer’s alterations had not yet taken 
place. 
After the death of Deemster John Joseph Heywood in 1855, Bemahague passed to his 
married daughter Mrs. Elinor Daly (sometimes spelt ‘Daley’).  Following her death in 
1861, she left the estate to her son Francis David Daly who was a minor when he 
inherited.  In 1863, while Francis Daley was still an adolescent, his Trustees leased the 
property to the Lieutenant Governor, Henry Brougham Loch.  Although Castletown was 
the capital of the Island until 1874 when Douglas obtained the title, mid-nineteenth 
century Douglas was a rapidly expanding commercial town with excellent sea links and 
it is little wonder that the new Lieutenant Governor should wish to reside near to the 
town. 
The Lordship of Mann has belonged to the Crown since 1765 when the British 
Government reclaimed it from the Duke of Atholl in order to put an end to smuggling 
which was causing them financial losses.  Historically, the custom was to have a 
Governor and a Lieutenant Governor who served underneath him.  However, the 
Lieutenant Governor ceased to have a superior after the Lieutenant Governor Colonel 
Cornelius Smelt, who had served under Governor Atholl, was given the title in 1830.   
Prior to Bemahague, the official residences of the Governor have included prominent 
buildings such as Lorne House in Castletown, plus Castle Mona and the Villa Marina in 
Douglas. 

3 
In Wood’s Atlas of 1867, the proprietor of Bemahague was said to be ‘William Daley’.  
Following this, in 1871 Tynwald passed an Act confirming the lease of Bemahague to 
the Treasurer of the Isle of Man for 21 years at an annual rental of £200.  The lease 
stipulated that the Daly family were to contribute £1,000 towards the cost of any 
alterations and repairs which were deemed necessary in order to make the property a 
suitable residence for the Lieutenant Governor. 
In February 1871, the Liverpool architect Gustavus Hamilton was engaged in order to 
produce plans for alterations and extensions to the property.  These alterations took 
nine months to complete, during which time the Governor was a guest at 
Bishopscourt. 
In 1882, the owner of Bemahague, Francis David Daly died and he left the estate in 
trust for his son, John Joseph Heywood Daly. 
In 1886, there were negotiations for Tynwald to purchase Bemahague from John 
Joseph Heywood Daly.  However, Mr. Daly was still a minor at this time and did not 
have the power to sell.  As a result of this, in 1890 Tynwald signed a lease of the 
property for a further 21 years and voted an additional £1,000 for alterations in order 
to extend the guest and servant accommodation.  The subsequent alterations were 
carried out in 1890 by the local architect and builder, James Cowle. These included 
breaking through the wall between the drawing room and the dinning room and fitting 
folding doors so that the two rooms might be thrown into one, while a bay was built 
on to the reception room and a smaller one to the dining room. Additional servants 
bedrooms were also created through rebuilding the kitchen wing as a two storey 
extension. 
In 1891, the lease was transferred to the newly appointed Government Property 
Trustees.  A report in 1900 revealed the property was costing approximately £200 
annually for repairs, in addition to the rental charge.  As a consequence of this, in July 
1903 a Tynwald committee proposed that the house along with 112 acres of adjoining 
land should be purchased for a cost of £12,000 and on 24th November 1903, Mr. John 
Joseph Heywood Daly sold the property to Tynwald for that very sum. 
Despite the previous alterations to the property, further work was carried out as it was 
not yet considered to be satisfactory as an official residence for the Lieutenant 
Governor.  Internally, the main problems were said to be the small entrance hall and 
the awkward position of the reception rooms; externally, it was the proximity of the 
old farmhouse and stables to the main house.  The subsequent alterations and 
extensions were carried out between 1903 and 1906 to the design of the architectural 
partnership of Willink and Thicknesse of Liverpool.  The front or south western end of 
the house was pulled down and extended so that the reception rooms and study were 
enlarged, while a new hall, porch and main staircase were constructed. Various small 
outbuildings were removed and the farmyard was relocated. The stables were 
demolished and the cow house was converted into a stable and coach house. These 
changes saw great improvements to the property and a further enhancement was 
made when the property was connected to the main water supply, rather than the 
water being hand-pumped from two old wells. 
On 30th January 1906, all of the improvement works to Government House had been 
completed and the Governor was back in residence. 

4 
Architecture 
The gardens 
The estate is located in part of the remaining green space which separates Douglas 
from Onchan.  When approached from Governor’s Road, the property is reached by 
passing the lodge house on the right hand side and proceeding up the driveway which 
is bordered with mature trees.  The land rises towards the house, which is set in an 
elevated position providing views across the estate to the sea. 
There are approximately 12 acres of grounds which include the lawn or garden, 
woodland and grazing land.  In the gardens surrounding the property there are 
mature woodlands, within which the main species of tree are Sycamore, Ash and 
Beech.  In addition to these main species other trees include Lime, Cherry, Horse 
Chestnut, Red Horse Chestnut, Scots Pine, Fir, Birch, Apple and a New Zealand Yew 
located to the right of the main entrance door, which is said to be very unusual on the 
island. 
The gardens were greatly improved by Lord Raglan (Governor 1902-1918) who was 
responsible for much of the initial tree planting and the shrubberies beside the drive. 
The original rose garden was designed by Sir Claude Hill (Governor 1925-1931), 
although it has since been replanted.  Small ornamental trees were added by Earl 
Granville (Governor 1937-1945). 
Over the years the gardeners have contributed a great deal to the layout of the 
gardens and grounds.  Government House is said to be largely self-supporting with 
regard to flowers for indoor decoration and for fruit and vegetables from the kitchen 
gardens, which have a high stone wall. 
The main house – history 
The original farmhouse which stood on the site dated from the time the Christian 
family lived there (1600-1789).  The present property is thought to still include parts 
of the original house, although there have been numerous alterations and extensions 
over the years which have greatly changed the appearance of the building, that it is 
very difficult to determine if any section of the old farmhouse still exists.  Some of the 
remaining outbuildings are also thought to date from the Christian period, but the 
majority of these have been removed.  The Ordnance Survey map of 1869 shows that 
at that time there were many other outbuildings on the site than there are today and 
that they were arranged in a courtyard fashion behind the main house.  There also 
appears to have been a round-shaped horse-walk which was located to the north east 
of the outbuildings. 
Early changes to the property occurred during the early to mid-nineteenth century, 
when the tenant, Joshua Farrer, set out to improve the house by rebuilding the south-
east wing with a full height bay facing towards the sea in the Regency style. 
Further alterations took place in 1871 to the design of the Liverpool architect, 
Gustavus Hamilton.  The changes included adding a first floor over the recently rebuilt 
south-east wing and a dining room to the east end of the property. 

5 
There were also alterations in 1890, which were designed by the local architect and 
builder, James Cowle.  These alterations saw the dining room converted into a billiard 
room and provided a new kitchen.  James Cowle was also a Diocesan architect and he 
is most famous for designing Douglas Railway Station and the Isle of Man Prison on 
Victoria Road, Douglas. 
Major alterations took place between 1903 and 1906 to the design of the architectural 
partnership of Willink and Thicknesse of Liverpool.  Willink and Thicknesse are most 
famous for designing the Cunard Building (1913-1916) at the Pier Head in Liverpool, 
which is a Grade II* Listed Building.  In these alterations to Government House, the 
front or south-western end of the property was rebuilt in order to accommodate a 
large reception hall along with a porch, staircase and intercommunicating reception 
rooms.  In addition to this, some of the old Christian family farm buildings (which were 
in the immediate vicinity of the main house) were demolished in order to improve 
lighting and ventilation, whilst other old farm buildings were converted in order to 
provide staff cottages. 
In 1914, there was a fire in the servant’s quarters.  The portion which was destroyed 
in the fire was the oldest part of the house with its small rooms and low ceilings, so 
the opportunity was taken at this time to rebuild the accommodation and provide 
improved facilities. 
Inside Government House, several Governors’ Ladies have left their mark.  In the late 
1920’s Lady Hill installed the crystal chandeliers from Paris which are in the reception 
rooms.  In 1945 Lady Granville embroidered a bedspread and satin hangings with the 
Royal Coat of Arms for the Tynwald room for the visit of King George VI and her 
sister, Queen Elizabeth, the late Queen Mother.  In the 1960’s Lady Garvey added 
embroidery to the soft furnishings. 
The bell of H.M.S. Manxman, which served with the Royal Navy as a minelayer during 
the Second World War is on display in the hall of Government House.  The inscription 
on the bell reads ‘This bell was given by the people of the Isle of Man in memory of 
one of its greatest sailors, Captain John Quilliam R.N. who served in H.M.S. Victory at 
Trafalgar 1805’. 
The Coat of Arms which is over the entrance doors is thought to have originally been 
from the old Custom House in Peel. 
The main house – construction 
The main external walls are constructed of solid stone and are approximately 600mm 
thick with an external render which is pebble-dashed.  Some of the main internal walls 
are also built in solid stone, with others being lath and plaster covered stud partitions. 
The main roof is pitched with a natural slate covering.  There are flat roofs over the 
main stairwell and the main entrance porch which have a felt covering.  The windows 
are sliding sashes in painted softwood with single glazing. 
The lodge house,  Glencrutchery Road entrance 
The Ordnance Survey map of 1869 shows that at that time, there was a lodge house 
at the Glencrutchery Road entrance to the property, although this building has since 

6 
been demolished.  The lodge house of today dates from 1921 and it was designed by 
Major Harry Cowle.  A memorial notice in 1907 commemorating the life of a Mr. John 
Cowley mentioned a Mr. Harry Cowle, who was then said to be “…the Government 
architect”. 
There were once tall gates pillars and iron gates at the entrance to Government 
House, which dated from the same time as the lodge house of 1921.  However, these 
have since been removed as in subsequent years the entranceway has been deemed 
to be too narrow for modern traffic. 
Government House is included on the Protected Buildings Register for the 
following reasons: 
Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality 
The property is a large mansion house set in extensive grounds in an elevated position 
above Douglas bay. These grounds provide an important setting for the house. 
The oldest parts of the Government House were originally an eighteenth century 
quarterland farmhouse known as ‘Bemahague’.  The property has been updated and 
remodelled at various times in the past, with a mixture of architectural influences. 
Some of the alterations were designed by prominent architects, including the local 
architect and builder James Cowle, who also designed Douglas Railway Station and the 
Isle of Man Prison on Victoria Road, Douglas.  Further changes were planned by the 
architectural partnership of Willink and Thicknesse of Liverpool, who are most famous 
for designing the Cunard Building, a Grade II* Listed Building, located at Liverpool’s 
Pier Head. 
Historic Interest 
The estate of Bemahague was one of the old principal quarterlands of the Island and it 
was farmed by a branch of the Christian family from about 1600 until 1789. 
The property has been the official residence of the Lieutenant Governor since 1863 
and has been owned by Tynwald since 1903.  It has and continues to provide 
accommodation for official guests to the Island and is the location for many functions 
and social gatherings. Between 1863 and 2015, twenty two Lieutenant Governors have 
used Government House as their official residence. 
Close Historic Association 
There have been many notable residents of the estate of Bemahague and of course, 
many Lieutenant Governors have lived there during the property’s life as Government 
House. 
The Heywood’s were a prominent Isle of Man family who owned Bemahague from 
1789, passing the estate down through their descendants until it was sold to the 
Government in 1903.  The Heywood family have provided the Island with MHKs, 
Speakers, Deemsters and even a Governor.  Perhaps the most famous member of the 
family was Peter Heywood, who was aged only fourteen when he was the midshipman 
on the H.M.S. Bounty.  His sister Nessy lived at Bemahague for a time and it was 

7 
largely due to her heroic efforts that he was cleared of involvement in the Mutiny and 
went on to have a successful career in the Royal Navy, commanding his own 
vessel and having distant lands named in his honour. 

9 
SOURCES AND REFERENCES 
Books 

Hulme, PJ , unknown, Government Houses in the Isle of Man 

Kitto J., 1990, Historic Homes of the Isle of Man.

Kniveton G.N., 1992, The Onchan Story.

Kniveton G.N., 1997, An Illustrated Encyclopaedia of the Isle of 
Man.

Slack S., 1996, Streets of Douglas – Old and New.
Articles 

A Six Day’s Tour through the Isle of Man, By a Stranger, 1836.

Manx Millennium – Part 1, January 1999.

Manx Millennium – Part 5, May 1999.
Directories 

1823, Pigot’s Directory.

1863, Thwaite’s Directory.

1894, Brown’s Directory.
Maps and Plans 

1867 Wood’s Atlas, DoLGE.

1869 Ordnance Survey, DoLGE.

Current digital map, DoI.
Internet Sites 

A Manx Note Book www.manxnotebook.com


Evtracks from
GOVERNMENT
HOUSES
IN THE ISLE OF MAN
PeterJ, Hulme



GOVERNMENT HOUSES IN THE ISLE OF MAN
Foreword by His Excellency The Lieutenant Governor Major General Sir Laurence New, C.B., C.B.E.
I am delighted that this booklet has been
produced: it is a credit to Mr. Peter Hulme,
lately the Government Secretary, and Mr.
Gordon Kniveton, lately the Headmaster of
Murray's Road Junior School, respectively the
author and publisher. I would also like to thank
the Manx Government for their enthusiastic co-
operation.
As to Bemahague, it has been occupied by Her
Majesty’s personal representative since 1863
and I can say with my predecessors that it
makes both a delightful family home anda very
effective official residence. I hope that this
documentary will be enjoyed as much by those
who come regularly to the House as by those
who have seldom if ever been. I know that my
wife andI will be very sad to leave its comfort
and charm behind us. .

INTRODUCTION
Passing along Governor’s Road, Onchan, and
observing the extensive parkland and well-tended
gardens of Bemahague, one could be forgiven for
concluding that the impressive mansion in the
grounds was built for its present purpose as a
residence for the Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of
Man and his family. However this is not so, nor was
this property, now called Government House, the first
and only Government House.
This booklet traces the history of the early residences
of the Governor, culminating in the purchase and
improvement of Bemahague by the Isle of Man
Government, and gives an insight into its present
accommodation and furnishings. It also records the
Royal Visitors to the House and includes
photographic portraits of the Lieutenant Govemors
who have lived there and had charge of the estate.
The early history of Government House at
Bemahague has been adapted from a booklet written
by Air Vice Marshal Sir Geoffrey Rhodes Bromet,
Lieutenant Governor of the Island from 1945 to 1952,
which was published during the last year of his
appointment. The new material has been compiled
from Manx Museum and Government records, and
from details supplied by the Lieutenant Governors
since that date.
PETER J. HULME
THE ENVIRONS OF GOVERNMENT HOUSE
Viewed from the air, Government House grounds and
the surrounding estate provide the last remaining green
belt between the capital town, Douglas, and the fast-
growing district of Onchan on its eastern boundary.
This green belt extends from Summerhill to Signpost,
Comer and bisecting the seaward end is Blackberry
Lane, which is the best approach to Governor's Road
in order to appreciate the extent ofthe estate.
From Governor's Road the front drive passes, first, the
lodge and then, after curving slightly to the right,
provides a distant view of the large and elegant house.
The drive is bordered by mature hardwood trees which
shelter the estate from the worst of the winter weather.
However, a constant programme of replanting is,
necessary to replace the casualties of the storm winds.
Careful planning by the original builders has resulted
in a gentle upward sweep towards the house, set on
higher ground, where there is an unimpeded view
across the estate to the sea.
Many of the other
should be made
highways in the Island,
It should be noted that Government House is private property and i
personal invitation from the Governor. Similarly, the estate roads
House are private and there is no right of access thereto.
The drive is in daily use as the main access for all
official visitors, Members of Tynwald and senior civil
servants, the latter being too busy rehearsing their
business with His Excellency to notice the
magnificent carpet of naturalised crocuses and
ils which surrounds the drive in the spring; the
two fossilised tree trunks or the young saplings
planted from time to time to commemorate special
visitors and important occasions.
At the head of the drive is the hard tennis court and a
turning circle large enough to take the gleaming
limousines of Royal and State occasions. The Coat of
‘Arms over the entrance doors at one time adomed the
old Custom House ini Peel.
But before we enter the house, let us first pause to
reflect on the early history of Bemahague and of the
former Government Houses in the Isle of Man,

IN THE BEGINNING:
THE FIRST GOVERNMENT HOUSES
The Celtic inhabitants of the Isle of Man came under
Norse rule during the ninth century when the Vikings,
whose first recorded raid on the Island was in 798
A.D., established themselves as settlers under various
chiefs. A definite line of rulers was established after
the Battle of Skyhill (1079 A.D.) when Godred
Crovan (the King Orry of Manx tradition) having
defeated the local forces became the first king of a
dynasty which lasted until 1265, when the Island
passed into Scottish hands.
A period of confusion followed. Scotland and
England both claimed the overlordship and nominees
of each nation held the Island from time to time.
Eventually, the Kings of England prevailed over the
Scots and granted the Lordship of Mann to various
English noblemen until it came to Sir John Stanley
(ancestor of the Earls of Derby) in-1405.
With the exception of a short interval during the
Commonwealth period, the Derbys retained the
Lordship until 1736 when, the male line of the family
failing, it passed to the second Duke of Atholl, a
direct descendant of the seventh Earl of Derby. The
Atholls held it until 1765 when the British
Government, anxious to obtain control which would
enable them to put an end to the smuggling which
was causing serious financial loss, decided to revest
the Lordship in the Crown, It has remained there ever
since.
The connection of the Atholl family with the Island
was not quite broken, however, for in 1793 the fourth
Duke was appointed Governor. He was the last person
to bear this title, as upon his death the Lieutenant
‘Govemnor (Colonel Cornelius Smelt), who had served
under him, assumed the full duties of the office while
continuing to be known as Lieutenant Governor - the
title which from then until the present day has been
held by the Sovereign’s representative in the Island.
The building of the medieval fortress of Castle
Rushen was probably commenced around 1250 A.D.
by the Viking rulers ofthe Island and was used as an
alternative residence to Peel Castle. Additions and
enlargements to Castle Rushen continued in later
years, particularly in the 14th century, until the fourth
Earl of Derby, Henry Stanley, built a house for
himself within the embrace of the castle walls. This
was towards
the end of the 16th century.
In 1644, James, seventh Earl of Derby (known as the
Great Stanley), decided to improve on his ancestor's
residence and ‘altered the old dwelling. This is the
building now known as the Derby House which still
stands alongside the fortified gatehouse.

During the time of the Commonwealth, from 1649 to
1660, the Govemor occupied a house ‘in the Market
Square, across the Parade where the soldiers of the
gamison used to drill. A sketch by Damel King from
about 1650, now in the Manx Museum and
reproduced on page 3, shows the house quite
distinctly and indicates what it was. The Derbys also
had a series of apartments adjoining the cathedral
within Peel Castle which served as summer
residences, but they fell into ruins early in the 18th
century.
Following the Restoration and the return of the
Derbys to power, the house within Castle Rushen was
occupied by the Governor or the Lieutenant Governor
of the day who were expected to vacate it should
either of their seniors require it. In 1692-93 the house
was again altered, this time by the addition of a new
bagnio or bath house. The old bagnio in West Strect
was converted by the Lord into a residence.
‘The tenth Earl of Derby left no children and was
succeeded in the earldom by a distant cousin.
However, under the terms of the grant made by James
1, the Lordship of Mann passed, in 1736, to the
second Duke of Atholl, James Murray, who was
descended from a daughter of the seventh Earl of
Derby.
In addition to what may be called their main
residence in Castle Rushen, the Atholls appear t0
have maintained other establishments. In 1793 John
Murray, fourth Duke of Atholl, lived in a house in
Douglas. This is now known as the Douglas Hotel
and here he resided until Castle Mona, which he
commissioned to be built, was ready for occupation in
1804. At this time the Duke also atquired the estate
of Port-e-Chee where he often stayed during the
summer.
In 1830, the Lieutenant Governor ceased to have a
superior in the Island because the custom of having
both a Governor and Lieutenant Governor came to an
end. During the next few years there was a gradual
encroachment on the Lieutenant Govemor’s quarters
in Castle Rushen by the extension of the Courthouse.
The last Lieutenant Governor to live there wi
Colonel John Ready and in 1834 the time was
appropriate for a move.
f
i

LORNE HOUSE, CASTLETOWN
AS a result of the extensions of Courthouse
accommodation in Castle Rushen, the Lieutenant
Governor, Colonel John Ready, was told by the
British Government that in future he and his
successors must find residences for themselves but
would be givén an allowance to assist them,
At that time Lorne House, a very beautiful house with
extensive grounds which still stands across the river
from the Castle, became available. Local belief is that
King Olaf 1 (1113-1153) lived on the site of the
present house and this was confirmed to some extent
in 1786 when builders came across the remains of an
carly Viking house there.
In the early 18th century this area was owned by the
‘Taubman family of nearby Bowling Green House. In
1727 John Taubman sold some of the land to Captain
William Fitzgerald of the Castle garrison, However,
in 1757 it retumed to the Taubman family when the
widow of Capt. Fitzgerald sold it back to them. In
1791 Christian Taubman (whose portrait is in the
‘Manx Museum) married Colonel Cunninghame who
‘was an Irish officer of the garrison. They came to live
at Lorne House early in the 18th century and added to
the original buil
GOVERNMENT HOUSE.
Lorne House from across the river, after a drawing by
E. Delamotte. (Manx Museum)
Colonel John Ready, Lieutenant Governor from 1832 10
1845, who moved from Castle Rushen to Lorne House,
Castletown. (Manx Museum)
The new extensions were marked by a grand ball
there on 18th February, 1828, but by 1834 it was
empty again, its contents having been auctioned. This
suited the Lieutenant Governor, Colonel Ready, who
took a lease on the house for 13 years. His successor,
the Hon Charles Hope, renewed the lease for a
further period up to 1860. However, when the lease
expired and the owner of the house wished to live in
it himself, it was felt that an official residence should
be built for the Lieutenant Governor.
The authorities in London estimated that a new
residence would cost about £7,000. The proposal was
promptly rejected by the British Treasury who let it
be known that it thought the matter should become
the responsibility of the Isle of Man Government,
although it was prepared to continue the old
allowance of £150 a year to the Lieutenant Govemor,
who would be responsible for making his own
arrangements.

At this juncture it appeared that Lome House would
soon cease to be Government House, but before we
tum our attention to two further buildings that became
for a time the seat of the Lieutenant Governor, it 1s
pleasing to record that, following a period in private
hands, Lorne House was bought in 1931 by the
Christian Endeavour Holiday Homes and very many
young people spent happy days there until it was sold
again in 1972. During the 1939-1945 War it was also
the Manx Children’s Home whose Glencrutchery
Home in Douglas was being utilised by the Royal
Navy as a hospital,
After 1972 Lome House was taken over by a local
group of finance companies who spent a considerable
amount of time and money in renovating the property.
In subsequent years the house was sold again and is.
now occupied as the administrative offices of a bank.
The Hon. Charles Hope. Lieutenant Governor from 18
to 1860, who resided at Lorne House (Manx Museum)
6

CASTLE MONA AND VILLA MARINA
The foundation stone of Castle Mona was laid in
1801 and the building was completed three years
later, A splendid banquet was held on 4th August,
1804, to commemorate the opening and fifty two of
the most notable persons on the Island were invited
by the Duke: The architect for the building was
George Stuart (or Steuart) whose work on the Island
also included the Red Pier, completed in 1800 Castle
‘Mona was built of freestone from the Isle of Arran
and was transported here by the ancient method of
carrying it inshore on sailing vessels at high tide. The
storie was then dropped overboard and retrieved at
low tide.
Although he remained Governor of the Island until
1830, the 4th Duke of Atholl paid few visits to his
new residence. He last stayed there in 1826 and in
1832 the estate was disposed of and the Castle was
converted into a hotel. in 1836 the hotel came under
new ownership and Mr Herron ofPortobello, Dublin,
turned Castle Mona into one of the finest hotels of
that period.
When Francis Stainsby-Conant-Pigott arrived on the
Island to succeed the Hon. Charles Hope as
Lieutenant Governor in 1861, he took rooms at the
Castle Mona in its early splendour. (Manx Museum)
7
Castle Mona Hotel. Only ten days after his arrival he
reported that he had heard of nothing suitable in
Castletown, either a house or a site for building a
house. He therefore took residence in a house in
Douglas for which he paid a rent of £250 per annum,
considerably more than his allowance of £150. The
house he had taken was Villa Marina, in the grounds
of which the present Villa Marina complex now
stands.
The first Villa Marina was built by Robert Stewart
who, despite the change in spelling was the son of
George Steuart, the architect of Castle Mona. Robert
was a young English lawyer who had inherited
property in the Island from his father. Stewart
encouraged the Duke of Atholl to sell him some land
bordering on his father’s estate and it was on this land
that he built his mansion, which he named ‘Villa
Marina.’ It was completed shortly after Castle Mona
and further purchases in 1811 and 1822 extended its
grounds. Stewart meanwhile had become Receiver
General of the Iste of Man and, later, Collector of
Customs for Douglas. He died in 1832 and his widow
sold Villa Marina to the Misses Dutton who for some
years used the house as a select school for girls.

Villa Marina. from the Illustrated London News, 1861.
A later view of Villa Marina mansion from Marina Road (Manx Museum)
8

Governor Pigott left Castle Mona for his new
residence in the spring of 1861 but he did not enjoy it
long as he died suddenly while spending Christmas
1862 at his home in Hampshire.
After the death of Govemor Pigott, Villa Marina was
acquired by Henry Bloom Noble. The history of the
town’s benefactor is well chronicled and many
monuments to his generosity remain in the form of
buildings and land, including the grounds of Villa
Marina, It was here that he died in 1903 having risen
from virtual poverty to one of the richest men of his
cra,
The successor to Governor Pigott was Lord Henry
Brougham Loch who arrived on 17th February, 1863,
He leased the present Government House and,
therefore, was the first of the Lieutenant Governors to
reside at Bemahague.
Lieutenant Governor Francis Stainsby-Conant-Pigott
(1861-1862) who leased Villa Marina,
rane ao
Extract from Illustrated London News Feb 23, 1861
Great rejoicings took place at Douglas, Isle of Man, on Thursday week, consequent upon the arrival of
his Excellency Francis Pigott, the newly-appointed Lieutenant-Govemor of the Island, to take up his
permanent residence at Villa Marina, near Douglas. “It was,” says the Manx Sun, from which we
extract a few particulars of the new Governor's reception, “both a holiday for all classes and a
triumphal entry for his Excellency such as has not been accorded to any previous Governor within the
memory of the oldest Manxman.” A little before three o'clock a signal gun from Douglas Head
conveyed the welcome intelligence that the packet containing Lieut~Govemnor Pigott was in sight and,
shortly after, repeated salutes from the packet and the shore announced her nearer approach. Exactly at
three o'clock the Tynwald, under the command of. Captain M’Queen, gaily decorated with flags,
steamed gallantly up the harbour, and was moored opposite the Steam-packet Office. His Worship the
High Bailiff, Major Pollock, Mr. Burman, Mr. Harris, Mr. Gell and other gentlemen then went on
board to greet the Lieutenant-Governor who shortly after made his appearance on deck and was loud:
cheered. His Excellency landed accompanied by Mrs Pigott, escorted by his Worship the High Bailiff;
the two Misses Pigott together with Captain Pigott and his two brothers. The Artillery Corps presented
arms and his Excellency entered the carriage provided for him amid the cheers of the assembled
thousands, the band playing ‘God Save the Queen.’ A procession was then formed and proceeded
along the North Quay, up Bank Hill, along Atholl-street, up Prospect Hill, along Finch Road and
Marina-road to Castle Mona. The whole line of route was thickly thronged with enthusiastic
spectators who loudly cheered his Excellency as he passed. On the arrival of the procession at Castle
Mona gates the societies formed in double line and, allowing the carriage to pass up the centre, they
entered the grounds of the castle where His Excellency was received at the entrance to the hotel by a
guard of honour of Volunteer Rifles.
‘The mansion of Villa Marina, situated a short distance from Douglas, has been leased by Lieut.-
Govemor Pigott for a term of years. (The above account accompanies afull page illustration in The
Mlustrated London News which is reproduced on the next pages).


BEMAHAGUE: GOVERNMENT HOUSE
OF MODERN TIMES
The present Government House stands almost
certainly on the same spot as that on which there once
stood the house which long ago took its name from
the estate. No traces of the original house are now
visible, though some of the out-buildings of the
present house, used as garages, etc., may once have
been attached to it.
Long in the possession of a branch of the prominent
‘Onchan family of Christian, the earliest mention of it
is in the Manorial Roll of 1511 where Edmund
McCorkell is shown as holding it and paying a Lord’s
rent of twelve shillings and sixpence a year for the
privilege. This McCorkell was a man of some
eminence, beng not only a Deemster but also one of
the ‘four merchants’ through whose hands the entire
trade of the Island
had to pass.
In 1600, another entry in the Roll shows Donald
Christian to be the owner, and from then on he, his
sons and his sons” sons held it until 1778. Edward
Christian succeeded to the property which, like that of
many another old Manx family, was heavily
mortgaged. This, together with the cost of upkeep,
eventually caused Edward Christian to sell the
Property.
Bemahague House, early nineteenth century, from a
lithograph in the Manx museum.
Bemahague, about 1885, showing alterations and extensions. (James Fenton)
B

Christian may not have vacated the house at once.
Colone! Townley, who was living nearby at the
Hague, in writing of Christian's burial at Kirk
Onchan on the 3rd March, 1790, refers to him
‘Old Mr. Christian of Bemahague, the next house
a8 if he were still living there. It is perhaps a
reasonable assumption that it was Heywood and his
“young, handsome wife’, as Townley calls her, who,
finding the old house of the Christians unsuited to his
new dignity as a landowner, decided to replace it by
‘one of a better type and so became responsible for the
nucleus ofthe building which we now see.
When Robert Heywood died in 1809, the property
passed to his son, Deemster John Joseph Heywood
who let it for a while to an English gentleman of great
fortune named Farrer. He was a connection of the
Earl of Sandwich and is said to have enlarged and
beautified the house to such an extent as to make it
appear quite changed. At this time, two fossilised tree
trunks, which stand half way up the main drive on the
left, were given to Mr. Farrer by one of his visiting
sea captains, and were said to have come from the
Gulf of Akaba. Later, Bemahague house was
occupied by a Mr. Samuel Barker and was considered
to be a ‘remarkably handsome seat”
‘The Deemster died in 1855, leaving the estate to his
daughter Elinor for her life, and afterwards to Francis
David Daly, her son by her husband John Hickman
Daly of Carrickfergus. Elinor died in 1861, and the
trustees who looked after her estate during her son’s
minority handed it over to the young heir when he
reached the age of twenty-one. He, in his tur, when
he died on 3rd November, 1882, left it in trust for his
son John Joseph Heywood Daly.
Before Francis Daly had come of age his trustees
leased the house to Governor H. B. Loch, who shortly
after his arrival in 1863 informed the British
Government that he had ‘taken up residence within
two miles of Douglas’. This action, incidentally, was
one which intensified the argument - started in his
predecessor's time - as to where the Governor should
live; and called forth petitions and counter-petitions
from staunch upholders of the ancient capital and
equally vehement supporters of the rapidly growing
commercial town of Douglas. The former were
heartened by the action of the Deputy Governor
(Mark H. Quayle) a true Castletown man who,
immediately he took office, had ordered that the
Courts, which had recently been brought to Douglas,
should retum to their old habitat,
Castletown tried to tempt the Governor south with
offers of a house called ‘Paradise’ or, alternatively,
“West Hill’, which now forms part of the Buchan
4
Henry Brougham Loch, later Lord Loch G.C.B.,G.CM.
D.C.L.. PC., Lieutenant Governor from 1863 to 1882, »
the first Lieutenant Governor to live at Bemahague.
School. The baits they dangled so temptingly prov
of no avail, however. Bemahague was preferred ¢
eight years later, in 1871, Tynwald, taking the burc
on their shoulders, passed an Act confirming the le:
of it to the Treasurer of the Isle of Man for 21 year:
an annual rental of £200, the lessor to contrib:
£1,000 towards the cost’of such alterations a
improvements as were considered necessary to mi
it a suitable residence for the Governor
of the Isla
These repairs must have been considerable, for th
took upwards of nine months, during which time
Governor was a guest at Bishopscourt.
In 1886, when the lease had several years still to r
negotiations for a purchase were commenced, but
trustees who were administering the property
behalf of Mr. J J. H. Daly, still a minor, had not
power to sell, so in 1890 a further lease for 21 ye
was signed and Tynwald voted another £1,000
more alterations
These were to be made to meet complaints that
facilities for entertaining were inadequate. There *
not enough room indoors, it was said,
accommodate even the limited number of guest:

which necessity compelled the list of invitations to be
restricted, To improve matters in this respect the wall
between the drawing-room and the dining-room was
broken through and folding doors fitted so that the
two rooms might be thrown into one, while a bay was
built on to the reception room and’a smaller one to
the dining-room.
Another complaint was of the shortage of servants’
bedrooms, which were so few that rooms for those
brought by, guests had to be sought for in
neighbouring houses. To remedy this, the ancient
mud-and-stone-built wall on the kitchen wing - then
of one storey only - was pulled down and rebuilt from
the foundations so that it would with safety support
an additional storey over the kitchen and scullery on
which to make another five bedrooms.
In 1891, the Government Property Trustees were
constituted and the lease was transferred to them. In
May, 1899, Tynwald appointed a committee of five
members to consider the whole question of a
residence for the head of Government, but when the
question was raised again in 1900 it was found that
nothing had been done and there were only two of the
committee still available. So a new committee was
appointed and began its labours by considering a
suggestion from the Governor that the house should
be bought, as it was costing about £200 a year for
repairs in addition to a similar amount paid for the
rent. In 1902 Lord Raglan replaced Lord Henniker
and in July, 1903, the Tynwald Comiittee submitted
a report which recommended that the house with the
adjoining land (112 acres) be purchased for £12,000.
Mr. J. J. H. Daly, being then of age, parted with it on
the 24th November, 1903, for that sum.
Despite previous alterations the house was not yet
satisfactory as an official residence for the
Lieutenant-Governor. Indoors, the main trouble was
the small entrance hall and the awkward position of
the reception rooms; outdoors, the proximity of the
old farmhouse and stables on the west side. The gable
of the latter building, indeed, came to within six feet
of the house, while the fact that the stable yard was
close to, and four feet higher than, the base of the
house walls was a great inconvenience.
To put the first trouble right the architects, Messrs.
Willink and Thicknesse of Liverpool, pulled down the
front or south-western end of the house and extended
it in such a manner that the reception room and study
were enlarged, while at the same time a new hall,
porch and main staircase were constructed.
To deal with the trouble caused by the old farm
buildings of the Christan occupation, various small
outbuildings were removed, which improved both
fighting and ventilation. The farmhouse itself was
next converted into two staff cottages while the
farmyard and the buildings on it, with the exception
of the cowhouse, were moved to a site some 300
yards away, To complete matters, the offending
stables were demolished and the cowhouse converted
into a stable and coach-house.
‘Sir Spencer Walpole, K.C.B.
(1882-1893)
Sir Joseph West Ridgeway,
KCB., K.CS1. (1893-1896)
Is
Lord Henniker, J.P., DL. (1896-1902)

Lord Raglan, G.B.E.. CB.
(1902-1919)
Attention was also given to the water supply. With the
exception of some water piped in from a spring in an
adjoining field in 1890, the entire needs of the house
were obtained from two old wells, one of which gave
water found on analysis to be unfit for human
consumption and the other a liquid which was little
better. To make matters Worse, these two very
doubtful blessings were only to be obtained by
strenuous work on old-fashioned hand pumps. It was
obviously high time that a connection should be made
to the mains, and this was done.
On 30th January, 1906, it was reported that all work
had been satisfactorily completed and the Governor
was in residence. But it was not long before there
were more complaints, this time of smoking fires and
damp walls. The chimney stacks were raised and
extra spouting provided to carry away the water
which was flooding the walls,
More trouble came on the night of 24th April, 1914,
when a fire broke out in the servants’ quarters,
Prompt action and the fact that it was a still night
prevented the blaze spreading, and there was neither
joss of life nor personal injury. In a way it was a
blessing in disguise, for the portion destroyed was the
oldest part of the house where the rooms were small
and the ceilings low. The opportunity was taken,
when rebuilding, to raise the roof and provide a staff
bathroom and strongroom for the storage of plate, etc.
In the late 1920's Lady Hill did a great deal to
beautify the rooms and it was she who was
responsible for the installation of the lovely glass
Major General Sir
KCVO..CB. (1919-1926)
16
illiam Fry, Sir Claude Hill, K.CSJ..CLE.
(1926-1933)
chandeliers in the reception room and drawing-room.
These came from Paris.
Sir Montague Butler, K.CS1,CB..C1.E.,CV.0.,CBE,
(1933-1937)

GOVERNMENT HOUSE 1939-1945
During the difficult years of the Second World War,
the Isle of Man was fortunate in having as its
Lieutenant Governor, Vice-Admiral the Hon. William
Spencer Leveson-Gower, C.B., D.S.O., later, Earl
Granville. He was a descendant of the Dukes of
Sutherland and the Marquises of Stafford. His wife
was Lady Margaret Rose Leveson-Gower, nee
Bowes-Lyon, who was a sister of Her Majesty The
Queen, now Her Majesty The Queen Mother. Many
Island residents will remember with great affection
how completely she engaged herself in Manx life and
held together, by her charm and personality, what
little social gathering there was in those austere times.
With the administrative affairs of a wartime Island to
occupy the minds of Members of Tynwald, it is not
surprising that very little attention could be paid to
the development of Government House, apart from
the necessary repairs and maintenance. Indeed, Lord
Granville appears to have raised nothing of
consequence with the Government Property Trustees
about the needs of the house and the records of the
Trustees show that their only business in that
direction concemed the estate lands, The following
extracts from the Minute Book of the Government
Property Trustees reveal the type of wartime business
transacted"
16 January 1941
The Trustees considered that the sum of £36 should
be paid to a tenant as the result of the requisitioning
of one of his fields on the Bemahague Estate as a
recreation ground for intemees.
2 April 1941
‘The Trustees inspected all their property in Douglas
and Onchan and reduced the Government expenditure
by £100.
5 June 1943
‘The Trustees considered a letter from a tenant relative
to the ploughing up and reseeding of two fields and
decided not to depart from the decision reached
previously not to provide seeds in consequence of the
tenant's failure to observe the covenants of the lease.
28 September 1944
A report from the Government Surveyor on the
defective condition of the central heating boiler at
0
Vice Admiral The Earl Granville, K.CV.O , C.B.,DS.0.
(1937-1945)
Government House was considered and it was
decided to order a new boiler immediately at an
estimated cost of £80.
10 January 1945
It was reported that the field adjoining Blackberry
Lane had been de-requisitioned and returned to the
former tenant.
31 March 1945,
The Trustees decided to adopt the recommendation in
the Douglas Corporation Water Engineer’s report to
lay a new 4 inch main from Wybourne Drive to
Government House at an estimated cost of £340.
(Reproduced with the permission of the Minister for
the Department of Highways, Ports and Properties)

At Government House a bedroom was added to the
‘Tynwald Room in preparation for the visit of Their
Majesties King George VI and Queen Elizabeth in
August. Countess Granville, the Queen’s elder sister,
worked the bedspread and satin hangings with the
Royal Coat of Arms for the fourposter bed. These
were subsequently stored in the Manx Museum but
since Sir Laurence New’s governorship they have
been placed permanently on display in the Fenella
Suite at Government House.
The Island’s wartime Govemor finally departed at the
end of August, the same day as Air Vice Marshal Sir
Geoffrey Bromet arrived to succeed him. The
occasion was marked with great ceremony at H.M.S.
Urley, the Fleet Air Arm establishment at
Ronaldsway. The ship’s complement of 2,000
assembled to witness the change over and, as Earl
Granville flew out, Sir Geoffrey was driven to Castle
Rushen to be swom in as the Island’s first post-war
Governor.
‘A permanent reminder of the Second World War can
be found prominently displayed in the hall of
Government House. This is the brass bell of H.M.S.
MANXMAN which served with the Royal Navy as a
fast minelayer, the ship's bell being given by the
Manx people. During her long career the ship paid
numerous visits to the Island and when she was
finally retired the bell was returned to Government
House for safe keeping and, should the occasion arise,
be ready to serve on another ship of that name. The
bell is also a reminder of the many Manxmen who
served on board the ship. The bell is inscribed as
follows: This bell was given by the people of the Isle
of Man in memory of one of its greatest satlors.
Captain John Quilliam R.N. who served in H.M.S.
Victory at Trafalgar 1805.
By the end of the war there was a very considerable
arrears of work to be completed as soon as men and
materials, and the necessary finance, became
available. In August, 1945, the Trustees decided, for
example, that the immediate requirements of china
and glassware for Government House should be
provided as soon as practicable. The question of
furniture was left until the arrival of the new
Lieutenant Governor-Before the departure of Earl and
Countess Granville in August, 1945, they had two
very important peacetime events to attend to.
Following the British General Election a visit was
made by the new Socialist Home Secretary. The
Countess was well known for her tact and it is on
record that Mr. Herbert Morrison was more than a
little pleased when he that she was suitable
attired for the occasion wearing a dress patterned with
red roses!
Is
The Countess Gransifte, farmerly Lads Margaret Ros
Leveson-Gower (nce Bowes-Lvon) and elder sister to He
Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother: 5
The bell of HM.S. Manxman, World Mar 2 mmelayer anc
one of the fastest ships in the Royal Navy

GOVERNMENT HOUSE TODAY
Hanging in the dining room is a portrait in oils of
King George 111, a copy of the original by the
Scottish artist Allan Ramsay, probably painted in
1762, and now hanging in Buckingham Palace.
Ramsay, with the help of pupils and others, made
numerous reproductions of this portrait for
distribution to Government Houses and embassies
etc., and the Bemahague picture is almost certainly
one of these and dates from about 1765. The
circumstances in which it was acquired are not
known, but the appointment in that year for the first
time of a Governor directly representing the Crown
would furnish a good reason for the presentation. A
manuscript diary written by a visitor to the Island in
1822 mentions a portrait of George 111, which must
have been this one, as hanging in the ballroom of
Castle Mona which was, at that date, the residence of
the Duke of Atholl, the then Governor. It is a
reasonable assumption that when the Duke, the last to
hold the office of Governor, left the Island the portrait
would be transferred to the official residence of the
Lieutenant Governors who followed him.
At the end of his term of office in 1926, Major
General Sir William Fry was presented by the Isle of,
Man Legislature with a magnificent silver casket
containing an address to him in appreciation of his
services to the Island. The address was read in
‘Tynwald but unfortunately the casket was still in
preparation and it was necessary to forward this to
him at his home in England. Sir William’s letter of
thanks was read in Tynwald on 13th April, 1926, in
which he thanked the Members of the Legislature for
the ‘very beautiful and artistic casket” which had
arrived safely. Visitors to Government House might
therefore find it strange to see it today gracing the
The embroidered bedspread and satin hanging as worked
by The Countess Granville in preparation for the visit of
King George VI and Queen Elizabeth.
formal dining table where it provides a most attractive
conversation piece. It was returned there as a result of
the family generosity and now forms part of the
official contents of the house. Largely of silver, it
stands on an ebony base and is decorated with four
enamel panels showing views of Government House,
Government Buildings, Tynwald Hill and Castle
Rushen together with the Manx Coat of Arms on the
front and the star of a Knight Commander of the
Royal Victorian Order on the reverse. The lid of the
casket is a beautifully wrought Viking ship and it also
bears Sir William's monogram.
oeamnoonen aor ae earn 07
THE GROUNDS OF GOVERNMENT HOUSE
Dr. Larch S. Garrad, in her book ‘A History of Manx Gardens’, records that Lord Raglan was
responsible for much of the initial tree planting and the shrubberies by the drive. Lord Granville added
smaller omamental trees while Sir Claude Hill designed the original rose garden, since replanted. The
main road plantation dates from 1912, while Sir William Fry and Sir Montague Butler brought in
‘commercial forestry subjects to improve the screening. While the herbaceous borders are secondary to
the spacious lawns used for formal functions, they are good and the lilies in the pond flower well.
It was in the time of Sir Geoffrey Bromet that a hard tennis court replaced the old herbaceous border
on the left of the drive near the house. A new herbaceous border with the lily pond in the centre was
provided throughout the whole width of the lawn in front ofthe reception rooms.
‘Over the years the permanent outdoor staff have contributed to a very significant extent to the pleasing
layout of the gardens and grounds, but it is only to be expected that improvements previously carried
‘out have sometimes been superseded by further changes resulting from the use of the grounds for
garden parties etc. Government House is largely self-supporting when it comes to flowers for indoor
‘decoration,
and for fruit and vegetables from the kitchen gardens,


The Government House and grounds that we see
today are a result of the knowledge and experience of
successive Governors in the management of large
estates; the flair of their Ladies in the furnishing and
decoration of the rooms so as to create a pleasing
sense of style and proportion throughout; the skill of
the permanent staff, both indoors and out, who are
happy to maintain the dignity of this official
residence; and, not least, the willingness of the
Trustees on behalf of Government and the Manx
people to enhance the appearance of a property which
plays a valuable part in the political and social life of
the Island.
Perhaps the most important change affecting
Government House in recent years has been the
radual transfer of official Government functions
from the Lieutenant Governor to the appropriate new
Government Departments. Acknowledging and
encouraging that process, Sir Laurence New on
arrival decided to move his office, his ADC/Private
Secretary and his immediate staff out of Government
building up to Government House. In his study at
Government House he is by no means detached from
Government: he has regular meetings with the Deputy
Governor and First Deemster, the Chief Minister, the
Lord Bishop, the Attorney General, the Chief
Constable, the Chief Secretary, the Head of Crown
Division and the Clerk of Tynwald. Here -also the
Governor and his wife hold their weekly planning
meetings at which they consider invitations from
organisations, agencies, parishes and patronages. As
regards the latter they are Patrons or Presidents of
some 100 charitable and specialist organisations.
Royal Visits are also initiated and co-ordinated from
Government House, the most recent having been that
of Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal Highness
‘The Duke of Edinburgh in August, 1989. There are
many overnight visitors on official business and a
steady stream of guests for receptions, lunches and
dinners, together with parties for young people.
Government House is seldom quiet.
This new emphasis of responsibility — often referred
to as the Governor's ‘vice-regal’ role — has resulted in
a considerable increase in the demands and pressures
on Government House and its staff to meet the
requirements of the more open accessibility of the
Lieutenant Governor and Government House, much
more so than a few generations ago. Today a growing
number of people are familiar with the House and
grounds, but for those wishing to know a little more
about its contents and function this documentary
concludes with a selection of illustrations which
reflect the part that Government House plays in the
‘many sides of life on the Isle of Man in modern times.

‘Air Vice Marshal SIR GEOFFREY BROMET. K.B.E , CB.,
DS.O (1945-1952)
‘SIR AMBROSE DUNDAS FLUX DUNDAS, K.CLE.
CSI (1952-1959)
- ~
< .
‘SIR RONALD GARVEY, K.C.M.G,K.CVO..MBE. SIR PETER STALLARD Kom G..CVO.,MBE.
(1966-1974)
(1959-1966)
2

SIR JOHN PAUL. G.C.MG.,O.B.E., MC.
(1974-1980) (1980-1985)
‘A happy scene in the grounds of Government House with Onchan Schoolchildren during the visit of
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in July. 1963.
2B

The Yellow Drawing Room, Government House
4

The Dining Room. Government House
s eat Pate.
Government House staff during the vist of H.R.H The Prince Edh
and guests including Lord und Lady Whitelc
25
1, Tynwald Day 1986

f
Mr and Mrs Nigel Mansell being introduced to HRH The Tynwald Garden Party guests being introduced by F
Sai ggivard during a Government House Party, 7th Excellency and Liddy Now te HRA Princess Margar
July 1986, 6th July, 1987,
yi iere Maddrell, widow of Mr Don Maddrell, Minister Sir Laurence and Lady New have sive
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, plants a children’s partis for then hone helped in some w
Star tuly, 1989, °° © he drive to Government House on This party was held on Sth November [988 doer ore
2Ist July, 1988. their heroes, Terry Ball, who has since died of leukaen
is seen with Lady New.
aa
Sir Laurence New investing Mr David Keggin of HM. The Band
of HM. Royal Marines (Flag Officer Plymor
Coastguard with the British Empire Medal in the Blue beat the reireai on We lars of Government House on
Drawing Room of Government House on 7th March, 1990. eve of Tynwatdd
Day. 4h July, 1989,
26

A view of the top table set for luncheon in the marquee when her husband was Lieutenant Governor of the Island,
during the vist of Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal 1 normaly hangs above the bed 1n the main guest Suite at
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh on 8th August. 1989 Sir Government House Also pictured are the Queen and the
Laurence and Lady New entertained 82 guests on this Duke of Edinburgh, having each planted a tree, meeting
occasion Behind the table 1s the emtbroulered coat of arms Government House staff.
worked by the Countess Granville, aunt of the Queen,
His Excellency and Lady New welcome the incoming Lieutenant Governor, Air Marshal Sir Laurence Jones, KCB., AFC,
FB.LM., and Lady Jones during theur preliminary visit in May, 1990.
7

ROYAL VISITORS DURING THE REIGN OF
HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II
1955 9th August Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh
1956 25th July Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Kent.
1960 9th November Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra of Kent
1963 4/7th July Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother
1965 4/6th July Her Royal Highness The Princess Margaret and Lord Snowdon
1969 16/17th May His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh
1969 11th June His Royal Highness
The Duke of Edinburgh
1972 2nd August Her Majesty The Queen, His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh and
Her Royal Highness The Princess Anne
1975 27th June His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales
1976 18th May His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh
1979 14/1Sth March Her Royal Highness The Princess Anne
1979 23rd May ‘Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester
1979 Sth July Her Majesty
The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh
1979 6/1th September Their Royal Highnesses Prince and Princess Michael of Kent
1983 13/1SthJuly ‘Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra and the Hon. Sir Angus Ogilvy
1984 27/28th September Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother
1984 1/3rd October Her Royal Highness The Princess Anne
1985 16/18th May Her Royal Highness The Princess Alexandra and The Hon. Angus Ogilvy
1986 6th June His Royal Highness The Duke of Kent
1986 7/9th July His Royal Highness The Prince Edward
1986 4/Sth September _His Royal Highness Prince Michael of Kent
t 1987 3/6th July Her Royal Highness The Princess Margaret
j 1988 26/27th July Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Kent
1989 8th August Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh
Write fy Peter J. Mali
Buildings ad\ sor Frank Comm ERICS.
nil pint Iskind Photographics ti.
Vrntect hy Print Contte> Wid, Builds, Ie Ot Mant
28
ne anna age
```
