# RB 246

Beaconsfield Towers, Jurby Road, Ramsey

## Parish
Ramsey

## Registration date
31/07/2007

## Extracted details
* Builders: William Creer, Lieutenant John Monk
* Construction: early 1840’s
* Reasons for registration:
  - Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
  - Historic Interest
  - Close Historic Association
  - Group Value
  - Age and Rarity


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/633005/0500246regbld-beaconsfield-tower-amd-030420.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 07/00246/REGBLD
Isle of Man
Government
Retitys Ellan Vannin
DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
To: The Owner/Occupier, Beaconsfield Tower, Jurby Road, Ramsey IM& 3PQ
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 31% July 2007, the Department of Local
Government and the Environment, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Beaconsfield Tower, Jurby Road, Ramsey, Isle of Man IM8 3PQ
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Committee.
Dated this 9" August 2007
By Order of the Department
INO}
E J Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

COACLULUCHT
Department of Local Government RIC
Of Ins
ee
and the Environment
Directorate of Planning and Building Control
Woodbury
Home
of Rest
Beaconsfield Tower Residential Home Cronk Ghennie
St Olaves Lodge
Group Surgery
Ballandreas
Cumberlan
The Recta
=
02
= acieaiaaeal ss
Km 0.01 0. tis 00a 0S 06 OF
1:844
licence number GD000/97. © Crown Copyright, Department
of Local Government and the Environment, Isle of Man. Date 23 March 2007
P Base Map reproduced from the Isle of Man Survey mapping, Comments 07/00246/REGBLD
ri
Reproduction prohibited without prior permission.
GKiw
«Produced using Uniform 7.3 at DLGE, Murray House, Mount Havelock, Douglas, [M1 2SF

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: Beaconsfield Towers
ADDRESS: Jurby Road, Ramsey
POST CODE: IM8 3PQ
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Ramsey Town Commissioners
GRID REF: 445 951
Introduction
Beaconsfield Towers is a residential home located on Jurby Road in Ramsey. The
complex includes the base of a windmill tower and adjacent buildings which were
originally a combined corn and saw mill.
The mill was constructed during the early 1840’s and it was known as ‘Monk's Mill’, or
the ‘Lezayre Steam and Wind Mills’. The mill closed during 1873 and since then the
buildings have had many uses, they were initially converted into a private house,
followed by fiats, but they now function as a residential home.
The 64 feet tower was shortened in height during the 1960’s and it now stands only
two storeys tall. Historically however, there have been very few windmills actually
built on the Island, with watermills dominating, and therefore Beaconsfield Towers is a
rare example of its kind.
History
History of the Land
The land on which Beaconsfield Towers was built was originally part of the quarterland
of Ballachrink in the Parish of Lezayre. Within this quarterland, the site was part of
the holding of the Vondy farm, the farmhouse of which was located south of the Sulby
River and the site on which Beaconsfield Towers was later built was on the north
extremity of the farmland.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century, Sandy Road (now Bowing Road) was cut
through farmland northwards of the Windsor Road turning and “..from 1804 onwards,
the land on either side of this new road became appreciated less for agricultural use
than for development potential.” (Radcliffe C., 1989, p.247).
The corner plot on which Beaconsfield Towers now stands was bought by William
Creer from Thomas Vondy of the Vondy farm in 1833. The Deed of the sale describes
the parcel of land “known and distinguished by the name of Ropewalk Brows ... 143
yards from the corner of the road leading from Ramsey to Jurby, 129 yards from the
said corner on the road leading from Ramsey to Kirk Andreas and Bride, and 123 yards

across from the road leading to Jurby to the road leading to Andreas.” (Radcliffe C.,
1989, p.195). There are known to have been two ropewalks in Ramsey during the
nineteenth century. The earlier of the two, possibly the “ropery” which was noted in
Feltham’s Tour in 1797/8, was near to the entrance of Jurby Road and Beaconsfield
Towers was built on part of the site of it.
Monk’s Mill
William Creer built Cronk Ghennie on the eastern part of this site and in 1840 he sold
the remainder of the land to Lieutenant John Monk (Royal Navy Retired). Lieutenant
Monk’s family had come to live in Ramsey during the early 1800's and from 1825 he
had been living in a house which has now become the Royal George on Market Place.
The windmill was built on the westerly part of the site soon after the 1840 purchase.
The exact date of construction is unclear, however it was certainly built prior to 1842,
as in January of that year the Manx Sun newspaper reported that the sails of the
windmill at Monk’s Mill had been torn away in a gale.
In the 1841 Census, John Monk, aged 45, a corn merchant, lived at Ballachrink with
his wife Mary and their two children. Ballachrink was the quarteriand name for the
area of Ramsey where the mill was built. However, it is unclear which property the
Monk family were living in at this stage, possibly the new residence which they built on
the site, now known as ‘St. Olave’s Old Vicarage’.
The mill business was established in order to provide Lieutenant John Monk's son
William with a livelihood. However, although milling was a Manx trade, the type of
milling most common on the Island was water-milling and wind-milling was a much
more unusual skill. Therefore, William Monk ran the business as a corn merchant and
miller but he seemed to have little knowledge of the trade and relied on brought-over
English millers to work for him.
Notable English millers who worked at Monk’s miil included the Brown family. Charles
Brown came from England in the early 1840’s and became miller at Monk’s Mill in
1851, being recorded as resident at ‘The Windmill’ in the census returns of that year
as a 47 year old ‘Miller journeyman’, along with his wife and five sons. Also resident
at ‘The Windmill’ in the 1851 census was Thomas Kermode, a ‘Mill servant’ aged 73,
who lived there with his wife.
In 1861 Charles Brown’s sons Hornatio Nelson and Edwin took over his position at the
mill. Following this, by 1871 Horatio Nelson Brown was in charge of an inn called
‘Oddfellow’s Arms’ on West Quay in Ramsey and he then changed the name to ‘The
Trafaigar’, a name which it still retains to this day. Back at the mill, in 1871 the millers
were Robert Lord and Hugh Callister who were both Manxmen. The total number of
employees had varied over the years, “One man was employed in 1841, six in 1851,
two and an apprentice in 1861, and again six in 1871, after an auxiliary steam plant
was brought into use.” (Radcliffe C., 1989, p.196).
Following the addition of auxiliary steam power in 1871, the business became known
as ‘The Ramsey Steam and Wind Mills’. The mills had varying success until 1873 when
they closed and in the same year all of the Monk property in Ramsey was sold and the
family left the Island. It has been said that William Monk became bankrupt on 5"
November 1861 and this resulted in the sale of all the Monk property (Adames E.U.,

1973). This does seem probable, although the date of bankruptcy could be incorrect
as the mill wasn’t sold for a further twelve years. However, there has been no further
evidence found to confirm the bankruptcy.
Following the closure of the mills, Robert Lord who was a miller in 1871, continued to
live in a cottage at the windmill, although his profession had changed to ‘Railway
porter’ in the 1881 census and ‘Railway Station Master’ in the 1891 census. There
were also further residents on the site, suggesting that following the closure of the
mills in the late nineteenth century, the site was used mainly for residential purposes.
The Monk Family
The Monk family first came to live in Ramsey in the early 1800’s and in 1825
Lieutenant John Monk bought a house which has now become the Royal George hotel
on Market Place. This property was originally located on the waterfront, as the Market
Place was occupied by a lake until locals petitioned to have it filled-in. One of the
main instigators of this was John Monk and he became Treasurer of the fund. The
lake was filled in from 1835 to 1837 and thus, Market Place was created.
In 1850 Johnson’s Guide stated that "A /arge windmill has lately been built at the north
entrance to the town, by J. Monk., Esq., to whose enterprise and activity the public
are much indebted.”
The Monk family were recorded as living on the windmill site throughout the 1841 to
1871 census returns. In the 1851 census, Lieutenant John Monk was living at the
windmill as a ‘Half-pay Lieutenant, RN’, along with his wife. Also resident and running
the mill at the time was his son William John who was a ‘Miller, corn and fl (flax?)
merchant employing 6’ and there were two live-in maids.
Lieutenant John Monk died in 1856. His son William Monk continued to run the mill,
being recorded in the census returns of 1861, Thwaite’s Directory of 1863 and the
census returns of 1871 as doing so.
William Monk had become involved in Ramsey life during his time spent in the town,
being a member of the Ramsey Board of Health which was formed in 1864 and a
trustee of the first Grammar School in Ramsey, built on Waterloo Road in 1864. By
the time of the 1861 census, Willlam Monk had married Catherine Henrietta Wadison
and they had 5 children who were all born at the mill (Manx Star, 2/12/1983),
although his wife must have died young as he was said to be a widow in the 1871
census returns.
Subsequent Owners
Following the closure of the mills, in 1873 the site was sold by public auction to John
Kinlock Greig. It was described as being “...a parcel comprising ‘dwelling houses,
windmill, steam mill, outbuildings, land and premises called Lezayre Mills.” (Manx
Independent, 11/04/03, p.i5.
In 1874 the mill was sold to Edward Henry Christian of Ramsey who in turn sold it to
the well-to-do Thellusson family who spent a total of £6,000 (a significant amount of
money at that time) converting the windmill and the adjacent corn stores into a
dwelling house. The Thellusson family lived at Mount Auldyn on Jurby Road and in

Porter's Directory of 1889, Ernest Thellusson was recorded as living at ‘Beaconsfield
Tower’ and his son, Colonel Alexander Dalton Thellusson, was still living at Mount
Auldyn. This directory of 1889 is the earliest record found of the property being called
‘Beaconsfield Tower’, as it was still called ‘Windmill’
in the census returns of 1881. It
is likely therefore, that it was the Thellusson family who renamed the property, after
they had converted it from a mill into a house. Ernest Thellusson still lived at
Beaconsfield Towers until the 1901 census returns when it was known as ‘The Tower’,
The Thellusson family are said to have given their name to the ‘Thellusson Act’ which
limits the time which an inheritance can accumulate to 21 years (Manx Star, 1983).
Subsequent tenants include a Mr and Mrs Heaton Johnson, who lost their lives as
passengers in the Ellan Vannin disaster of December 3” 1909, leaving behind three
children. Another former resident of Beaconsfield Towers was a Captain Crowder who
lived there from 1917 to 1919 and who installed electric lights to the property. Other
previous owners included a Mr Wilkinson, a Mrs Hope and Canon Marsh. After Canon
Marsh moved out, the property lay empty for three years until 1933 when it was
bought by Thomas Arthur (Tommy) Corlett, whose family lived there for many years
until 1964. During the time of the ownership of the Corlett’s, the family operated a
battery-charging business from the mill in the Second World War, and at another time
they kept over 150 budgies in the tower.
Further Uses of the Site
The Corlett family sold the property in 1964 to a Mrs Simes. Following this sale, it was
reported in an article in the Courier in April 1966 that the top three floors of the tower
were to be removed, “Work has commenced on the demolition of one of the Island’s
outstanding landmarks — that is the old windmill at the top of Bowring Road, Ramsey,
now known as Beaconsfield Tower.” (Courier, 15/04/1966, p.3). The purpose of
shortening the tower was simply due to the fact that only the lower parts of the tower
were inhabited and it was to be converted into a house, with the remainder of the
buildings on the site being converted into flats. This loss of the tower is very
unfortunate, especially as the property only remained as flats for a short period of
time, because soon after in 1972 the property re-opened as a residential home. The
alterations to make the property a residential home were made for Mr Graham Done
and his wife who ran the business (Isle of Man Examiner, 04/02/1972).
Wells on the Site
The Ordnance Survey Map of 1869 shows the presence of two wells in the grounds
which have since been built over by the property known as ‘Thrimble Beg’. In bygone
days, the mill was noted for possessing a well in the garden which was 47 feet down
with 7 feet of water, although this well was filled in for safety purposes during the
1930’s. The mill was also renowned for supplying water to townspeople, “Before
houses in Ramsey were supplied by mains water, they sold water at one penny a
bucket from a well in the garden in front of the house.” (Manx Independent, 11/04/03,
p.15).
In the Manx Star of 14" October 1983, Sue Woolley wrote that Colonel Thellusson,
who lived at the mill in the late nineteenth century, sent three samples of water away
in order for it to be analysed. The samples were taken from his well at Beaconsfield
Towers, his household supply and from the Sulby River. The results were interesting,
"the water from the well was deemed as pure as it was possible for water to be, the

Ramsey household supply was ‘suitable for boiling vegetables in’, and the Sulby River
water would make ‘a good top dressing for the garden’.” (Manx Star, 14/10/1983,
p.8).
St. Olave’s Old Vicarage
St. Olave’s Old Vicarage is located adjacent to Beaconsfield Towers. It was built for
the Monk family who ran the mill business on the site from the 1840's to the 1870's
(Courier, 15/04/1966).
St. Olave’s Church was a chapel of ease for Lezayre Parish Church and it replaced
‘Taggart’s Barn’ on the site of the Cottage Hospital, which had been used as a chapel
of ease since 1849. The foundation stone for St. Olave’s was laid in 1861 and the
church first opened in 1870, but it wasn’t until 1881 that the Church Commissioners
made St. Olave’s a parochial district in its own right. Also in 1881, the vicarage,
described as being “near the windmill” (Gelling C.3., 1998, p.175) was bought by the
church.
The vicar in 1881 was Rev. William Morris and he is recorded in Directories of 1889
and 1894 as living in ‘Sunny Mount’, although it isn’t clear if this was a former name
for the Old Vicarage or a separate property, although there doesn’t seem to be a
property with that name in the present day. In the 1901 census returns ‘St. Olave’s
Vicarage’
was not in occupation.
This property is likely to have remained the vicarage of St. Olave’s until 1970 when the
current vicarage was constructed on a site adjacent to the church.
Architecture
The main entrance to Beaconsfield Towers is through a pair of stone gate posts on
Jurby Road. The historic parts of the site include the tower, a single-storey addition to
the south east of the tower and a small two-storey addition to the north east which
leads away from the tower. This section connects with further two and three storey
extensions at a right-angle which were originally the corn stores and they form the
main body of the complex. Each of these buildings dates from the time of the 1869
Ordnance Survey map, so they formed part of the original mill.
The Tower
The tower has a 35 feet diameter and is two-storeys high, having been truncated
during the late 1960's in order for the property to be converted into flats. It was
originally 64 feet high and was a leading landmark on Admiralty charts. The sweeps,
or the arms of the windmill, were 35 feet long with a diameter of 70 feet, which was
just enough to clear the roofs of the adjoining buildings (Manx Independent,
11/04/2003).
An article in the Courier in 1966 stated that when Mr Thellusson lived there in the late
nineteenth century "...each morning at five minutes to nine [he] would haul up a flag
to the top of the pole on the tower. This was to give the correct time to the men on
the Bahama Lightship, and it also did a service to the people of the neighbourhood.”
(Courier, 15" April 1966, p.3). When Mr Thellusson considered knocking the tower

down, a group of fishermen pointed out the tower’s value to them as a landmark. Mr
Thellusson was so impressed by this and as a result he painted the tower a vivid red
colour.
During the building works which took place during the late 1960’s, the tower was
converted into a house and was separated from the remainder of the buildings which
became flats. The lower floor of the windmill is a large single room, whilst the upper
floor has been divided into two separate rooms which were possibly used as bedrooms
in the past. A staircase, bathroom and kitchen were added in extensions which adjoin
the tower and these rooms now form part of the residential home, although the main
living accommodation is located in the remainder of the buildings.
It has been reported that a cellar has been discovered underneath the tower (Manx
Star, 14/10/1983). However, it is not clear whether there is still access to the cellar to
this day.
Adjoining Buildings
The buildings connected to the tower were originally part of the mill complex. They
were included on the Ordnance Survey map of 1869 and were converted into a house
in 1874. The largest of the buildings were originally the corn stores.
There have had to be extensive alterations inside, due to the property being converted
into a residential home. However, despite this, many features have been retained
such as the doorframes and the staircase, which has an unusual newel post and
decorative balusters. These features are likely to date from the late nineteenth
century when the Thellusson family converted the mill into a house.
St. Olave’s Old Vicarage
Also on the site, St. Olave’s Old Vicarage remains largely untouched, still retaining all
of its sliding sash windows. ‘This property dates back to the 1840’s and it is an
attractive house with some quirky features such as the decorative chimney stacks and
the curiously angled dormers which slope upwards from the main roof. If Beaconsfield
Towers were to be included on the Protected Buildings Register, it may be fitting to
also include this property on the list due to the connection with the Monk family, as
they built it as their family home when they ran the mill.
CONCLUSION
There have been very few windmills ever built on the Island, in comparison to
watermills which were a common site. This is possibly due to waterwheels being less
expensive to build than windmills, plus there are many streams on the Island which
have a constant flow of water, wind power is less predictable and the strong gales
which occur in winter could cause damage to the sails of a windmill, as occurred at
Monk’s Mill in January 1842.
In addition to Beaconsfield Towers, there are known to be reasonable traces of six
other windmills on the Island. These include Castletown windmill (c.1828),
Ballawhane Farm Andreas (c.1870), Ballacorage Farm, Ballaugh (c.1878), Baidromma,
Maughold (c.1880/1), South Barrule Slate Quarry, Malew (c.1902) and a large iron

wind pump at Billown Quarry, Malew (Manx Note Book). Of these, only the windmill at
Castletown is older than Beaconsfield Towers, with most dating from the late
nineteenth century. Five further sites on the Island have been suggested for the
locations of waterwheels, although no traces survive.
RECOMMENDATION
Beaconsfield Towers is suggested for inclusion on the Protected Buildings Register for
the following reasons;
Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
The bottom two storeys of the tower still stand and the presence of a windmill is a
rare site on the Isle of Man. The buildings which form the main body of the residential
home all date from the time of the mill and were all included in the Ordnance Survey
map of 1869. There are features inside the property which have been retained from
the late nineteenth century when it was converted into a house, such as the
doorframes and the staircase.
Historic Interest
Beaconsfield Towers is an important historical feature of Ramsey. The property is the
only windmill in Ramsey known to have ever existed and it is included on a heritage
walk in the town.
Close Historic Association
The mill and associated buildings, including St. Olave’s Old Vicarage, were built for
Lieutenant John Monk in approximately 1840. Lieutenant John Monk was one of the
main instigators in the creation of Market Place in Ramsey during the 1830's. His son,
William John Monk ran the mill and during his time living in Ramsey he became
involved in nineteenth century life in the town, being a member of the Ramsey Board
of Health and a trustee of the first Grammar School.
The Thellusson’s were a well-to-do family who lived at Mount Auldyn, which is a large
residence on Jurby Road. They bought the mill site in the late nineteenth century and
spent a total of £6,000 converting the buildings into a house, also renaming the site
‘Beaconsfield Towers’. The Thellusson family are said to have been involved in the
creation of the ‘Thellusson Act’.
Group Value
Beaconsfield Towers includes the windmill, along with the adjoining buildings which
make up the residential home. In addition to this, the site also includes the property
called ‘St. Olave’s Old Vicarage’, which served time as the vicarage of nearby St.
Olave’s Church, but was originally built in the 1840’s as the Monk family residence
when they ran the mill. If Beaconsfield Towers were to be included on the Protected
Buildings Register, it would be fitting if this building was also considered for inclusion
due to its historical connections with the mill.

Age and Rarity
Only a small number of windmills were ever built on the Island and of these windmills,
there are only reasonable traces remaining of seven, including Beaconsfield Towers.
The windmill at Castletown is the only other example which pre-dates Beaconsfield
Towers, with the majority of the mills being constructed during the late nineteenth
century. As Beaconsfield Towers was built in approximately 1840, the age of the mill
is significant as there were so few windmills on the Island at that time.

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
Books
Gelling J.C., 1998, A History of the Manx Church 1698-1911.
Radcliffe C., 1989, Shining by the Sea. A History of Ramsey 1800-1914.
Newspapers
Courier, 15" April 1966, p.3. Finale for 200 years old windmill.
Isle of Man Examiner, Friday 4" February 1972, p.6. Residential home to open soon.
Manx Independent, Friday April 11, 2003, p.15. Historic windmill site is put on the
market for £685,000.
Manx Star, Friday 14" October 1983, p.8. Story of Beaconsfield Mill.
Manx Sun, 29" January 1842. Sails of windmill torn away in gale.
Articles
Brown's Directory 1894.
Feltnam J., A Tour through the Isle of Man in 1797 and 1798.
Johnson's Guide, 1850.
Porter’s Directory 1889.
Thwaite’s Guide and Directory 1863.
Maps and Plans
Wood's Atlas, 1867, DoLGE.
Ordnance Survey Map, 1869, DoLGE.
Current digital maps, DoLGE.
Adames E.U., Plan and watercolour of Beaconsfield Towers (with some historical
notes), 12/10/1973. Manx National Heritage, Library ref: RA.7.L/1.

Photographs
Current photographs.
Aerial photographs (1995), Manx National Heritage.
Archive photograph (Midwood T.H., b.1858, d.1927), Manx National Heritage.
Archive photograph, www.ramsey-heritage.iofm.net/NorthRamseyWalk.
htm
Internet Sites
Manx Note Book website
www. isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook
North Ramsey Walk
www.ramsey-heritage.iofm.net/NorthRamseyWalk.htm
Windmills of the Isle of Man
www.windmillworld.com/uk/isleofman.htm
10
```
