# RB 215

Dunluce, Ballure Road

## Parish
Ramsey

## Registration date
27/01/2003

## Extracted details
* Builders: Mr. Crellin
* Construction: 1871 – 1871
* Reasons for registration:
  - special architectural and historic interest
  - high architectural quality
  - uniqueness in style
  - striking position within the setting of the surrounding Ballure Glen
  - historical associations with John E. Christian and the Christian family


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/632969/0500215regblddunluce.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB1
Registered Building No. 215
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1991
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1991
To: Mrs Georgina Vanessa Moore, Dunluce, Ballure Road, Ramsey, Isle of Man
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 20" December 2002, the
PLANNING COMMITTEE of the Department of Local Government and the Environment, in
pursuance of ifs powers under the above Acts and Regulations REGISTERED
Dunluce, Ballure Road, Ramsey.
as represented by the buildings shown outlined in red on the plan hereto attached, in the
PROTECTED BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic
interest.
JHE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or
demolition of the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an
obligation imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the
Planning Committee.
Dated this day of, Qatk SBWSY 208
By Order of the Committee
J Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM] 2SF.
NOTE:
Rights to request de-registration of the building are provided under the Registered Building
Regulations and in summary are that: _
Applications in writing for the de-registration of the building may be made by the owners or occupier of,
any other person having an interest in the building, within a period of 28 days of service of this notice.
Such application should be sent to the Secretary, Planning Committee, 1" Floor, Murray House, Mount
Havelock, Douglas, IM1 2SF.
In the event that de-registration is not requested by any party within the 28 day period described above,
then de-registration may not be requested within a period of 3 years.

C.Ci-
© Mr. T.P. Whiteway, Town Clerk, Ramsey Town Commissioners, Town Hall, Ramsey
e Director of Manx Museum and National Trust, Kingswood Grove, Douglas, Isle of Man;
° Advisory Council for Planning and the Environment, 52, Alberta Drive, Onchan, Isle of Man.

DepartmentofLocalGovernment&theEnvirenmeai,
fofe
af
Wee
Unauthorisadreproduction
«isteorMan
Ages
capyergnz
Seafield
624052
a

DUNLUCE,
BALLURE ROAD, RAMSEY.
INTRODUCTION (1.0)
1.1
Dunluce lies within Ballure quarterland, in the treen of Ballure, in the Parish of
Maughold. The other quarteriands which make up the treen of Ballure include
Ballastole, Ballacowle and Clenaige. Ballure is the only one of these
quarterland names which is still in use today, and the name Ballure itself
means ‘yew tree' or ‘home of the yews’.
1.2
Ballure quarterland included the land which is now on both sides of Ballure
Road, the iand in Ballure Glen and up to where the present reservoir now is,
plus the rough Lhergys south of the Glen. For many years the quarterland
was home to a Christian family, who were extremely influential in Ramsey. [In
later years the Christians were to sell plots of their land for the Ramsey
Waterworks, the Manx Electric Railway, and for the extension of the town up
Ballure Road. ‘At no time can this have been prime agricultural land, but it
had advantages which served this Christian family well - proximity to Ramsey,
with the possibility of engaging in various forms of trade there; proximity to the
Ballure Burn which, in the early eighteenth century, enabled them to build a
water corn-mill on its banks...' (Radcliffe W. and C., 1979, p.242).
1.3
The house does not appear on the first Ordnance Survey Maps of the area
which were surveyed during the 1860's, this could prove a date carved on the
side of Dunluce to be the correct date of construction, the carved date is
1871. | Originally Dunluce had close connections with Ballure House
(previously Ballure Cottage) which is lower down the glen, adjacent to the
shore. Ballure House considerably pre-dates Dunluce and it is featured on
the first Ordnance Survey Maps dating from 1870. The houses were in the
same ownership for many years until 1960, when they were divided and
Dunluce was sold off. The high walls surrounding Duniuce formed a common
enclosure around Ballure House, the lower pari of Ballure Glen, together with
an adjacent property, Seafield, which has since been demolished. The
Abstract of Title for Dunluce shows that both Dunluce and Ballure House
originally had strong links with Ballure Cottage on Ballure Road, adjacent to
the Manx Electric Railway crossing.Ballure Cottage was once the Mill House
of the Christian family's water corn mill. John Edward Christian of Ballure
Cottage owned all three properties, until his trustees sold the estate in 1920.
Together, the above houses historically formed the Ballure Estate, which once
comprised the entire quarterland of Ballure, the majority of this being indicated
as being in the ownership of John E. Christian in the 1867 Wood's Atlas.
1.4
John E. Christian was a wealthy landowner, extremely influential in the town
of Ramsey and instrumental in the development of sections of the town along

Bailure Road. At the time of the 1861 census he lived at Ballure Cottage a
modest residence compared with Dunluce, and it is thought that he had
Dunluce, more fitting as a Gentleman’s residence, built on his estate as his
new home, more befitting a gentleman of means. This would explain why
Ballure Cottage remained substantially unchanged for may years, escaping
the remodelling which may have occurred, had the property remained the
principal residence of the land owner. It would also explain the unusual aspect
of Dunluce: instead of having a grand entrance facing onto Ballure Road as
you would assume such a property to have, Dunluce faces the glen and the
back of the house is on Ballure Road. The commanding location of this
romantic ‘Gothick’ house in the picturesque glen setting, adds to its presence
and takes advantage of the sea views across Ramsey Bay. The fine pillared
entrance located on the Baillure Promenade, would have formed the grand
entrance to the estate, with visitors wending their way up through the
charming glen, before arriving at the entrance to the main house.
1.5
The following information was found in the Wood's Atlas (1867) for the treen
of Ballure (and land belonging to John E. Christian).
Treen & C. Name of No. on plan Proprietor Extent in
quarteriand or statute
no. of intack measure
Baliure Part of 6 J.S.G. Taubman 17 3 «(38
Ballacowle
Part of 84 0 20
Ballastole
Part of Billure 4 2 9
106 2 27
Ballure Part of 7 Robert O. 0 3 2
Ballacowle Christian
Bailure Part of 8 Trustees of QO O 27.5
Ballacowle Wesleyan
Chapel
Intack Part of No. 5 46 J. Edward 14 0 22
Christian
Ballure Part of Ballure 156 3 29
171 0 11
Ballure Part of Bailure 47 Ramsey 1 4 26
Waterworks Co.
The information shows that John Edward Christian who lived at Ballure
Cottage (recorded in the 1861 census) also owned the majority of the Ballure
quarterland. A copy of the Wood's Atlas is included with this report.
ARGHITECTURAL INTEREST (2.0)
2.1
Duniuce dates from 1871, it is built in the Victorian ‘Gothick’ style which was a
popular design at the time. This is characterised by steeply pitched roofs,
often marked with towers, topped with decorative ironwork; tall narrow
windows marked by decorative hood mouldings; highly decorative interiors

featuring intricate plaster work, fine fire places, and highly patterened
encaustic tile work. High quality craftsmanship can also be seen in features
such as door cases and stairways. Dunluce is a high quality example of this
period of architecture in the Manx context.
The current owners gave us to understand that the builder was a Mr. Crellin
who also built Seafield, the former adjacent property. Apparently Mr. Crellin
had a passion for building towers and Seafield was built in a similar design to
Duniuce, but had more evidence of the ‘Italianate’ influence. Dunluce was in
a state of disrepair when the current owners acquired the property : they have
since taken considerable pains to reinstate lost qualities and restore Dunluce
to its rightful prominence and standing in the townscape of Ramsey.
2.2
Dunluce is a very welcoming and hospitable house, dating from mid-Victorian
times when receiving and entertaining guests was a common pastime,
especially for the ladies of the house. The design of the house was gauged to
impress the visitor and give an indication of the wealth and standing of the
owner and his family. Externally, Dunluce is very Ecclesiastical in appearance
with its striking square tower and tall, lancet windows. A feature of the
entrance to the seaward side of the house, are the highly coloured and
intricately patterned stained glass side lights and fan light, which flank the
inner door. The entrance to the Ballure Road aspect of the house, although of
striking ecclesiastical design, adopts a more domestic scale for visitors
approaching on foot. The grounds in front of the house are form graded
terraces and extend to embrace the seaward extent of Ballure Glen. At the
time the house was constructed, wealthier families would sometimes have a
house which they occupied in the summer months, on the outskirts of the
town or even farther afield; but retained a house in the town centre for the
more inclement winter months. This may well have been the case for the
property being unoccupied save for the presence of a housekeeper, for period
of time as indicated in the census records.
2.3
The ground floor door-cases are remarkably similar to those on the first floor
of Cronk Brae, May Hill Ramsey, which is now a Registered Building.
Architecturally, Cronk Brae resembles Duniuce in many ways, it was also built
in the Victorian gothick style with an imposing tower. An original garden wall
in the back garden at Cronk Brae is similar to the form of the boundary walls
of Dunluce. We would surmise that there was a connection between these
two properties, through either the architect or the builder. Photographs of
Cronk Brae are included with this report.
2.4
Both the front and rear hails feature beautiful pictured glass windows and
typical Victorian tiled floors. Some of the internal features such as the
fireplaces have been removed and replaced with tiled designs by previous
owners. But the current residents are replacing them with styles which match
the character of the house. In recent years the Victorian conservatory was

replaced with a more modern style, but the original tiled floor and grand door
case have been retained, and these are currently being restored.
2.5
A striking and unifying feature is the presence of the high surrounding walls
which extend to the adjacent property Seafield, along with Ballure House and
the lower part of Ballure Gien. This is a substantial estate wail, for the most
part topped with spar, volcanic rock or slate on end. The height and quality of
this wall was a statement to the world at large that this was an important and
high status property. The wall is part of the concept of the house in the
context of its romantic glen setting.
2.6
Two large stone built gate pillars stand at the entrance to the property, two
pillars identical to these are also found at the entrance to Ballure House in the
glen. in the knowledge that Dunluce was the prime residence in the group of
properties within the estate walls, whiah were all under single ownership at
the time of construction, we would conclude that the entrance on to Ballure
Road would have been a secondary entrance, with the picturesque,
impressive and principal entrance being originally by way of Ballure
Promenade.
HISTORIC INTEREST AND ASSOCIATION (3.0)
3.1
Dunluce was first included in the census returns for 1881 when the sole
resident was Jane Kegg, from Lezayre, who was the housekeeper left in
charge. Also in the 1891 census, Jane Kegg was the sole resident of the
property, so the owner of Dunluce may have travelled much, or perhaps lived
away from the house during the changing seasons. In 1881 the sole resident
of Ballure House was a gardener left in charge, John Kennish (‘Old Pete’ of
Hall Caine's The Manxman fame), Ballure Cottage also had a gardener
resident at the time: it would seem that the owner of the estate was not in
permanent residence leaving the estate in the hands of the housekeeper and
staff.
3.2
Historically, Dunluce had close associations with Ballure House in the Glen
and it was written by Constance Radcliffe that ‘One of the best-known private
visitors to the Island was Dorothy Wordsworth, who kept a journal during her
tour in July, 1828. She and her brother, the poet William Wordsworth, had
come over to see his relations-in-law, Henry and Joanna Hutchinson, Island
residents, but Dorothy stayed in Ramsey on her own for a couple of days with
Mrs. Brew in Ballure Cottage in the Glen.‘ (1989, p.17). She wrote about the
beauty of the glen and shore and a visit to Ballure Church, ‘the church on the
hill, the burying ground of Ramsey, and formerly the sole parish church, a
very pretty building charmingly situated with trees aif around it, but, alas,
whitewashed roof and walls.’ (featured in Radcliffe C., 1989, p.18).

3.3
The Abstract of Title in possession of the current owners only dates back to
4920 and not 1871, which is believed to be the date of construction. The sale
was not for Dunluce, but for Ballure House (now Ballure Cottage by the
tramline). It was recorded on 22nd November 1920 that Amy Sarah Vondy, a
widow of Dunluce sold the property to William Sherry, who was at the time the
resident of Ballure House. The sum of one hundred and fifty pounds was paid
for the property. However there were certain restrictions placed on the
purchaser by the vendor:
(a) ‘No Building or erection of any kind is to be placed or kept on any part
of the scheduled property except a motor garage for private use in
connection with the purchaser's adjoining property called “Ballure
House" and nothing is to be stored on the premises which shall be a
nuisance or annoyance to any of the neighbouring owners or occupiers
of premises part of the Ballure Estate.’
(b) ‘The building of such Motor Garage shall be erected and finished in
accordance with a plan fo be approved by the vendor her heirs or
assigns.’
(c) ‘The purchaser shall at his own expense forthwith erect and for ever
maintain a good and sufficient boundary fence between the scheduled
property and the adjoining property of the vendor.’
3.4
In this sale the property was referred to as:
‘All and singular a certain plot or parcel of land situate on the West Side of
Ballure Road in the said town of Ramsey and in the Parish of Maughold part
of the Estate of Ballure and being Numbered '9' on the plan of the said Estate
of Ballure duly recorded on the 30th day of December One thousand nine
hundred and twenty and containing One thousand and five hundred square
yards of land or thereabouts together with all rights easements and
appurtenances thereunto belonging or in anywise appertaining to which (inter
alia) the vendor became entitled by deed of Sale dated the Twelfth day of
November One thousand nine hundred and twenty from John Edward
Christian and wife.'
However, it is highly unlikely that it was John E. Christian himself who made
this sale, as in the census returns of 1861, he is reported as living at Ballure
House (now Ballure Cottage), aged 49. The trustees of John E. Christian
would have sold the estate after his death.
3.5
On 12th May 1943, following the death of Amy Sarah Vondy, Dunluce and
Ballure Cottage were sold by her trustees, Nora Amy Sewell and others to
William Arthur Coffey, a haulage contractor of West Quay, Ramsey, and his
wife Florence Coffey. The following year on 8th August 1944 William Arthur
Coffey and Florence Coffey sold both Dunluce and Ballure Cottage to Joseph
Henry Murray, a manufacturer from Lancashire and Elsie Murray, his wife.

3.6
Joseph Henry Murray and Elsie Murray lived at Ballure House, in the Glen
and on 9th January 1960 they sold Dunluce to Kenneth George Boon, a
company director from Stafford for £3,300. The scheduled property was
referred to as:
‘A certain plot or parcel of land part of the estate of Ballure situate abutting on
Ballure Road in the town of Ramsey and Parish of Maughold and being
represented by the portion delineated and coloured pink on the plan hereto
annexed together with the dwelling house and premises thereon erected
called and known as “Dunluce" and to which said hereditaments (inter alia)
the Vendor became entitled by Deed of Conveyance bearing date the 8th day .
of August 1944 from William Arthur Coffey and wife.'
A copy of the plan referred to in this deed is included with this report, it
illustrates Ballure House and Dunluce when they were initially separated
through ownership, and the land was divided, with Dunluce retaining a portion
of the glen.
3.7
Kenneth George Boon died in Stafford on 12th March 1960, in his will dated
25th November 1959 his trustees were Percy Victor Wheeler, a chartered
accountant of Shrewsbury and Cyril Edwin Smith, a transport business
proprietor from near Stafford. The property was sold to Jane Rosemary
Harris, who was the tenant of Dunluce on 12th August 1965. On 26th
February 1969 Jane R. Harris and her husband Basil Gordon Harris sold
Dunluce for £12,000 to Richard Charles Leach and Elsa Mary Leach his wife,
who were from Kinlough House in Bride. Following this, on 19th June in the
same year, Richard Charles Leach died at Ramsey Cottage Hospital, and in
his last will and testament dated 23rd October 1988, Dunluce was left to his
wife. On 19th June 1980 Elsa Mary Leach died at Ramsey Cottage Hospital,
and in her will of 10th February 1978 Dunluce passed to her daughter
Claudette Florence Elsa Cope, a real estate agent from Florida.
3.8
On 20th May 1986 Claudette Florence Elsa Mackie, then of Summerhill,
Jurby, sold Duniuce for £56,000 to Andrew Robert Baker an engineer of Fairy
Bridge, Malew, and Kathleen Kay Baker, his wife. Following their divorce on
15th August 1994, Kathleen Baker gained possession of the house and she
lived at Dunluce until 6th August 1998 when she sold to Georgina Vanessa
Crowther, of Piccadilly Court, Queen's Promenade, Douglas for £210,000.
LANDMARK QUALITIES (4.0)
4.1
Although Dunluce is an imposing property, built on the cliff looking out to sea,
today it is largely hidden by the trees in the glen and can barely be seen from
the shore at all. As the property does not face onto Ballure Road, it is nota
significant feature of the landscape here. Duniuce is a large and very

beautiful building, however it can only be seen at its best when viewed from
its own garden.
GROUP VALUE (5.0)
5.1
Due to the rebuilding of Seafieid, the adjacent property, there are no other
houses in the area which are architecturally similar. However, Dunluce does
share its high characteristic boundary wall with the new Seafield building, also
with Ballure House by the shore and this wall is further continued in the lower
part of Ballure Glen.
5.2
Cronk Brae, on May Hill, Ramsey is architecturally very similar to Dunluce as
it is built in the Victorian gothic style with the imposing tower, and there is also
an old wall in the back garden which is similar to the boundary walls of
Dunluce. Perhaps architecturally there was a connection between these two
properties, although Cronk Brae is slightly older, dating from the 1860's.
Photographs of Cronk Brae are included with this report.
5.3
Duniuce was built in 1871, on the Ballure Estate under the ownership of John
E. Christian from Ballure Cottage. Also on the estate was Ballure House
(then Ballure Cottage), the house in the glen, adjacent to the shore. Dunluce
remained part of the Ballure Estate until the estate was divided in 1920 and
the owner of Dunluce, Amy Sarah Vondy, sold Ballure House (now Ballure
Cottage) to William Sherry. Later in 1960 the remaining buildings were
divided when Joseph H. Murray and Elsie Murray of Ballure House in the
glen, sold Dunluce to Kenneth G. Boon. Therefore for a group connection,
Dunluce could be associated historically with other buildings which were part
of the estate of Ballure including Ballure Cottage (by the tramline) and Bailure
House (in the glen).
AGE AND RARITY (6.0)
6.1
Dunluce is a relatively new building in comparison with many other properties
along Bailure Road, some of which date from the seventeenth and eighteenth
century. Therefore Dunluce is not significant for its age in the context of the
history of the local area and in relation to some of the older buildings.
Architecturally however, Dunluce is very different to all the other local houses
and it is distinctive as a resuit of this. The style is certainly unique within this
part of the town, the original building of Seafield, which was adjacent to
Dunluce on Ballure Road, was thought to be very similar in style , but the
replacement of Seafield with a more modern building means that within this
neighbourhood Dunluce is one of a kind.

CONCLUSION (7.0)
7.7
Architecturally Duntuce is a fine Victorian ‘gothick’ style house, designed to a
high standard, with many individual characteristics, which make the property
unique within the surrounding neighbourhood. Externally, the property has
remained largely unchanged and the character remains substantially intact.
Internally, some of the features such as the fireplaces have been lost and
replaced with modern styles, but the majority of the internal characteristics do
remain and add much to the special character and quality of the building. The
present owners are very sympathetic to the original character of the house
and are reinstating many of the features in an appropriate manner. Other
significant properties on Ballure Road date from either the seventeenth or
eighteenth centuries, and Dunluce which was built in 1871, is therefore not
significant for its age within this part of Ramsey.
7.2
Dunluce is considered worthy of inclusion on the Protected Buildings Register
on the grounds of its high architectural quality and for its uniqueness in style
and its striking position within the setting of the surrounding Ballure Glen with
which it is inherently linked. The building is also notable for its historical
associations with John E. Christian of Ballure Cottage and the Christian family
who owned the Ballure Estate, along with Ballure House in the glen and
Ballure Cottage adjacent to the tramline. It is thought propbable that John E.
Christian constructed Dunluce as his new residence, after he accumulated his
wealth.

THE CENSUS
RAMSEY CENSUS 1861
District 6, "Parts of Maughold District 2, now in Ramsey”.
(now Ballure Cottage, by the tramline)".
"Ballure House
No,4
Name | Place | Relation | Sex | Condition | Age | Occupation| Born
John E. | Ballure| Head Male | Widower | 49 Land Douglas
Christian | House proprietor
Edward | Ballure | Cousin Male Married | 49 Joiner Ramsey
Fargher | House
Elizabeth | Ballure| Wifeof | Female | Married | 50 England
Fargher | House | cousin Liverpool
Jane Bailure | Daughter | Female | Unmarried | 18 Ramsey
Fargher | House | of cousin
MAUGHOLD CENSUS 1871
District 1.
No. 96
Place Name | Relation | Condition | Age | Occupation Born
Ballure John Head Married 44 Carpenter Jurby
Cottage | Crennell
Ballure | Margaret Wife Married AN Maughold
Cottage | Crennell
Ballure | Isabella | Daughter 12 Scholar Maughoid
Cottage | Crennell
District 2.
No. 68
Place Name | Relation | Condition | Age | Occupation Born
Ballure Hugh Head Widower 75 Turner Maughold
Cottage | Kennish
Ballure | William Son Unmarried | 35 Sailor Maughold
Cottage | Kennish
MAUGHOLD CENSUS 1881

District 1.
No, 8
Place Name | Relation | Condition; Age | Occupation| Born
Ballure | William Head Married 68 Gardener | Michael
Cottage | Cannell
Ballure | Eleanor Wife Married 63 Braddan
Cottage | Cannell
Ballure John | Grandson 6 Scholar England
Cottage | James
Cannell
District 7.
No.9
Place Name | Relation | Condition | Age | Occupation Born
Ballure | James L. Head Married 66 Retired iron | Scotland
Rd Villa | Cromer merchant
Ballure Jane Wife Married 51 England
Rd Villa | Cromer
Ballure | Elizabeth | Servant | Unmarried; 23 General Ramsey
Rd Villa | J. Lace servant
Bailure | Christian | Servant | Unmarried) 25 Cook Maughold
Rd Villa } Joughin
District 1.
No 10.
Place Name [| Relation | Condition | Age | Occupation Born
Dunluce | Jane Head | Unmarried 46 Housekeeper | Lezayre
Tower Kegg in charge
District 1.
No. 11
Place Name | Relation | Condition | Age | Occupation Born
Ballure John Head | Unmarried| 44 Gardener in | Maughold
House | Kennish charge (
RAMSEY CENSUS 1891
District 4.
No.121
Place Name Relation | Sex | Condition |Age |Occupation | Born
Ballure John Head Male Married 33 Gardener | Lezayre
Cottage | Radcliffe
Ballure | Hannah Wife Female; Married 37 Ramsey
Cottage | Radcliffe
Ballure Daisy Daughter | Female Single 6 Ramsey
Cottage | Radcliffe
Ballure Amy Daughter | Female Single 2 Ramsey
Cottage | Radcliffe
Ballure Lizzie Servant | Female Single 14 Nurse Foxdale
Cottage | Radcliffe
10

Ballure Marie Nurse | Female| Married 65 Monthly Scotland
Cottage | Daugherty nurse
District 4.
No, 122
Place | Name | Relation| Sex | Condition | Age | Occupation | Born
Dunluce | Jane Head | Female Single 56 | Housekeeper | Lezayre
Kegg in charge
District 4.
No. 123
Place Name Relation | Sex | Condition Age | Occupation | Born
Ballure Jane Head | Female; Widow 61 Living on | Scotland
House Cromar ‘ own means
Ballure | Mary F. Servant | Femaie/| Single 20 | Housemaid | Douglas
House | Steward
Ballure Ann Servant | Female Single 50 General lreland
House | McCormick domestic
11

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
BOOKS AND ARTICLES
Dearden S. and Hassell K., 1995, The Isle of Man, A Postcard Tour, Volume
One - Ramsey and the North.
Radcliffe C., 1989, Shining by the Sea, A History of Ramsey 1800-1914.
Radcliffe W. and C., 1979, A history of Kirk Maughold, The Manx Museum
and National Trust.
MAPS AND PLANS
1867 Woods Atias, Manx Nationai Heritage.
1870 Ordnance Survey Map, Scale 1:2500 (25" = 1 mile), Manx National
Heritage.
OTHER SOURCES f
Archive photographs, Manx National Heritage.
Current photographs and site visit. (
Abstract of Title for 'Dunluce’, in possession of the owners.
The Census, Maughold and Ramsey Census Returns, 1861-1891, Manx
National Heritage.
12
```
