# RB 235

Parville', also known as Parville Place', Ballagawne Road, Ballabeg, IM9 4LF

## Parish
Arbory

## Registration date
01/09/2006

## Extracted details
* Architects: Anna Begbie
* Construction: 1580 – 1587
* Reasons for registration:
  - Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
  - Historic Interest
  - Close Historic Association
  - Landmark Qualities
  - Age & Rarity


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/631529/0500235regbldparville.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 06/00235/REGBLD
isle of Man
Government
Recttys Ellan Vienne
DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
The Caroline Pettit Trust
Parville Place
Arbory
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 30TM August 2006, the Department of
Local Government and the Environment, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Parville Ballagawne Road Ballabeg Castletown Isle Of Man IM9 4LF
Otherwise known as ‘Parville Place’
(As shown delineated and edged in red as the attached plan.)
as represented by the buildings shown outlined in red on the plan hereto attached, in the
PROTECTED BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition
of the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an
obligation imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the
Planning Committee.
Dated this 1 September 2006
By Order of the Department
Cao @Os
E J Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been C.
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and the
occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a previous
request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) | The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act
(period after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration)
is 21 days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act
(period after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is
5 years.
C.C.e-
1. Mr3 DR Kewley, First Floor, 5 Parliament Square, Castletown. IM9 1LA
2. Mr W. I. Lowey, Clerk to the Arbory Parish Commissioners, Castle View, Douglas Road, Ballabeg,
Arbory.
3. Director of Manx Museum and National Trust, Kingswood Grove, Douglas; ( )
4, SAVE Mann’‘s Heritage, 52, Alberta Drive, Onchan, IM3 1LX;
~~;

2piniog
pauomsog
231g
ado,
40
meay
PIEYS:O.
{pasones)
Jtuo9-uoN
seal]snozayu07-von
SpoayppsTeUnpesrysrEspa
snoxgywog
siepnog
Ja}LUODWON
pRuoMIsogRyRueg
paucinsagpas
asnoyse}o)spoog
Bumping
‘suntogsnosuelaost,y
[P40]
aoepng,
SHEN
ysuag Surox3jq
Arepunog
YEVWOtquUZ9Ore-O4wMONOCOARWRI
IU B-oorAadcdteuda
80gArepunog
wepJoays]
WAUTUOUTAU
9INpurHSWUTAOE
[207Fouganda
IYBEKdOD
WALG
epee
a
419520
seepey
429649
seepzr
BBLLeH
iszize
ATAMNSoe
NVWJ°FISIa
429769.
X
UEsacy
OPSOTE
aon
TPESJ-
JUSUTOIAUY
otf)PUR
JUSUMLIOAOD
[eo0TJomauedeq
>
Over

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: *Parville’, also known as ‘Parville Place’.
ADDRESS: Ballagawne Road, Ballabeg, Arbory
POST CODE: IM9 4LF
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Arbory Parish Commissioners
GRID REF: SC 247 705
Introduction
Parville is a large house set in extensive gardens, The property is situated in the
village of Ballabeg, in the parish of Arbory, within the sheading of Rushen.
The property is a landmark building which is visible for miles around, This is due to it
being located on an excellent site, in an elevated position adjacent to the parish
church. The estate of Parville includes the main house, a lodge, extensive walled
gardens with outbuildings and two adjoining fields. The stables lie on the church side
of Ballagawne Road which divides Parville from the parish church, but they have been
converted into a house and are now under separate ownership known as ‘The Coach
House’,
The earliest record of the name ‘Parville’ is in the Manorial Roll, Tenants of the
Bishop’s Barony (1580-1587). At that time the property was owned by the Parr family
who gave the property its name from combining their surname with the Latin word
villa’, rather than the Manx ‘balla’ which was usually used, the close proximity of the
Friary may have had an influence on the choice of name.
History
The estate of Parville dates back to the sixteenth century when it was referred to in
the Manorial Roll, Book of Bishops (Liber Episcopii) which dates from 1580-7, Parville
was the only property mentioned in the parish of Arbory in a list of the ‘Tenants of the
Bishop’s Barony’ and it was referred to as ‘Cottage and Croft, John Parr, 1587’.
Nearby Historical Sites
The area in which Parville is located includes some important and ancient religious
sites which include the parish church of Arbory and a former Franciscan Friary.
The adjacent parish church of Arbory dates back to 1759 but there was previously a
much older church on the site, which was built in 1328 and stood south of and parallel
to the present church (Gelling, 1998). The record of vicars for Arbory goes back to
1291, which is further than the records of any other parish of the Island.

The ruins of Bemaken Friary are located nearby and this was founded between 1367
and 1373 by Irish Franciscans (Grey Friars). Two Celtic inscribed stones dating from
the fifth century were found at the Friary which indicates that there was a much
earlier Christian use of the site (Kniveton G.N. (ed), 1997). Following the Dissolution
of the Friary which occurred around 1540, the chapel has been used as a farm
building and it is due to this use that the chapel still stands to this day,
The Parr Family
The Parr family originated from Lancashire and they were one of several families who
moved from Lancashire to the Island following the success of the Stanley's who
became Lord’s of Mann in the fifteenth century; other families who followed include
the Radcliffe’s and the Skillicorn’s, The Parr’s from Parville are believed to have been
related to Sir Thomas Parr of Kendal Castle (b.1483, d.1517) who was the Marquis of
Northampton and father to Queen Catherine Parr (b.1512, d.1548), Henry VIII's sixth
wife (Moore A.W., 1889, Old Manx Families).
Many members of the Parr family held important roles in the political and ecclesiastical
sectors of the Island and the first member of the family to hold an official rank was
William Parr who was Comptroller. In 1561 Edward, Earl of Derby appointed Gilbert
Parr a Commissioner with the responsibility of making regulations concerning Peel
Castle and Castle Rushen and from 1635 to 1643 Richard Parr was the Bishop of Sodor
and Man.
The Parr Family of Parville
The first member of the Parr family known to have a connection with the parish of
Arbory was John Parr who owned a cottage and croft (Parville) which was recorded in
the Book of Bishop’s in 1587. In the seventeenth century, Robert Parr (d.1645) was
the parish clerk of Arbory (he was recorded to have held this position in the Lord’s
Book in 1610 and 1630) and he is also the first member of the Parr family who is
known to have lived at Parville. Two of Robert Parr’s sons held religious posts; Robert
who was Vicar of Malew from 1633 to 1640, Rector of Ballaugh from 1640 to 1673 and
Vicar General in 1646; and Thomas who was the Vicar of Malew from 1641 until his
death in 1695 and who was famed for his personal record of events which he wrote in
the church registers.
Robert Parr who was the Vicar-General also had sons who held religious posts in
Arbory and other parts of the Island. His eldest son Charles (b.1644, d.1684) was the
Rector of Ballaugh from 1673 to 1684 and became Vicar-General shortly before his
death in 1684. Another son, Robert (b.1648, d.1712) was the Vicar of Lezayre from
1686 until his death in 1712.
John (b.1651, d.1713) was perhaps the most well-known member of the Parr family.
He was a MHK in 1679, Chaplain of Ballure in 1688, in 1690 ‘Parr’s Abstract’ was
published which was John Parr’s account of the laws of the Island at that time, he was
then Vicar of Rushen from 1691 to 1700, a Deemster in 1693 and the Rector of
Ballaugh from 1700 until his death in 1713. John Parr lived at Parville during his later
years and following his death in 1713 he was buried with his ancestors in the chancel
of the adjacent Arbory parish church (Kniveton G.N. (ed), 1997). It is to the time of
John Parr that the core of the present property is believed to date (Kewley J.D.R.,
2006).
—_

The ecclesiastical profession continued into the next generation of Parr’s, which
included Robert (d.1729) who was the Vicar of Arbory from 1713 to 1723, and Rector
of Bride from 1723 until his death in 1729.
The estate of Parville remained with the Parr family up until 1764 when it was sold by
John Parr who lived in Chatham. However, after leaving Parville none of the Parr
family had any sons who survived and by the end of the eighteenth century, the name
was extinct in the Island. However, despite the Parr’s leaving Parville in 1764 and the
property changing hands several times throughout the centuries, the original name
has been retained.
Other Residents of Parville
In 1764 the property was sold by John Parr of Chatham to John Quillian, the Attorney-
General of the Isle of Man. According to J.D.R. Kewley, John Quillian was purchasing
many properties at the time and died only four years after he bought Parville in 1768.
The property remained in the Quillian family and during the early nineteenth century
the property was owned by Dr. Quillian, a scholarly philologist before passing to the
descendants of the Quillian family, the Quirks. According to Directories and Guides,
from at least 1823 (Pigot’s Directory 1823) to at least 1850 (Johnson's Guide, 1850)
the owner of Parville was a Mr George Quirk who was Water-Bailiff and Receiver-
General for the Island. Following this, the property remained in the Quirk family, up
to at least 1867 (Wood's Atlas) but J.D.R. Kewley states that the Quirks "..a/vided
their time between Parville and Harold Tower in Douglas. Parville may well have slept
during this time.”
Wood's Atlas of 1867 records the proprietor of Parville (no. 27 on plan) as being the
Rev. James Quirk, although the Vicar of Arbory at the time was John Qualtrough. The
table shows more of the information supplied with Wood's Atlas; no. 28 on the plan is
the adjacent parish church and vicarage.
Wood's Atlas 1867, Parish of Arbory
Treen & co. Name of No. | Proprietor Extent in statute
quarterland on measure
lan A. R. P.
Bishop’s Barony | Cottage no. 5 3 0 23
27 ‘| Rev. James Quirk
Ardarry Part of Ardarry
Intack Nos 21,24,26, 34 19 3 22
&35 oo
23 0 7
Freehold Vicarage Glebe 28 | Rev. J. Qualtrough | 4 3 36
(Vicar)
In 1875 the Quirk family sold Parville to the Castletown Waterworks Company, who
had been granted permission to use the stream which runs through Parville in
September 1854. Also in 1875 the Castletown Waterworks Company sold the property
to John Thomas Clucas from Ballakilley, Rushen (J.D.R. Kewley), although this is likely
to have been an investment as he and his wife already owned a number of properties
on the Island. In 1885 Thomas and Margaret Clucas gave some of their land to the
north of the parish church for a new burial ground (Gelling C.J., 1998).

In October 1894 the property was sold to William Kelly and between 1894 and 1901
he purchased the two fields above the house, which have remained part of the estate
to this day. William Kelly was the first owner-occupier in Parville for many years and it
is therefore likely that he was responsible for the Victorian alterations and additions to
the property such as the tower.
William Kelly died in 1909 and in 1920 his son sold Parville to the tenant who was a
member of the Cooil's, a renowned Arbory family. At that time, some of the Cooil
family had moved to the Manchester area in order to be near to their well-known
drapery firm, Marshall and Aston, but despite this they still maintained a keen interest
in the affairs of the Island and Robert Cooil of Parville, who died in Hale, Cheshire in
1920 was an ex-president of the Manchester Manx Society.
Throughout the twentieth century the property changed hands several times and in
1996 the estate was bought by Mr S.L.I. Pettit who died in 2001, leaving Parville for
the benefit of the nation, in the hands of The Caroline Pettit Trust (named after his
daughter). This is a registered charity which intends to restore the property.
Architecture
Parville is a landmark building, situated on a slope which is elevated from the main
road and the plains lying to the south of Ballabeg. The south-facing elevation and
tower can be seen for miles around and the open gardens contribute to the character
of Ballabeg. The white colour of the property makes it more prominent and due to the
fact that it is situated adjacent to the parish church of Arbory, which is also a
landmark building, Parville is an important historical aspect of the local landscape.
The core of the present house is believed to date back to the time of Deemster John
Parr (b.1651, d.1713), (Kewley J.D.R., Notes for Registration Purposes, 2006). There
have been many alterations which have taken place in the intervening years, many of
which were Victorian, however there have also been some modern alterations which
have regrettably taken away some of the original features of the house such as the
sliding sash windows.
It is difficult to establish when each part of the house was built but according to the
1869 Ordnance Survey map, the main body of the property was already built by that
time. Since then the alterations have included the tower and the modern entrance,
the conservatory, the two-storey extension to the rear (which has the same castellated
wall top as the modern entrance) and the single storey kitchen and utility extension on
the north side of the property. With the sole exception of the conservatory, all of the
modern extensions have a flat roof.
The oldest part of Parville appears to be the central section which faces west towards
the church. This part of the house is distinguished mainly by the presence of
chimneystacks at either gable end, and although this section is likely to have been the
full extent of Parville at one point, it is rather tall and narrow when compared with
traditional Manx houses. The proportions of this section and the size of the window
on the first floor of the western (front) elevation suggest that there would have only
been the space for two windows across the first floor of the front elevation, as the
property is not long enough for the traditional Manx style which incorporated three
oN

windows. The front door is most likely to have been located in this western elevation
where it is to this day, the Ordnance Survey map of 1869 shows that the entrance to
the property was the opening from the road that the church is on, which leads to the
west elevation of Parville, further suggesting that this was the front elevation. The
entrance from the Main Road had not been created at the time of the 1869 Ordnance
Survey Map.
In the old section there are thick external walls, large chimney stacks at the gable
ends and an eighteenth century staircase located in the centre, although the
balustrade is modern. The eighteenth century staircase is at a right-angle to the front
door rather than facing it, which could suggest that this staircase may have been
added later, perhaps at the same time as the southern wing was built (pre-1869
Ordnance Survey map). The staircase only rises to the first floor, with the second
floor being accessed through a staircase in the tower, which was a later Victorian
addition, suggesting that the original property would have only had two-storeys. This
is further implied by all of the second floor windows being a modern dormer style.
Inside the property there is an internal window below the staircase between the old
part of the house and the kitchen extension, this window is low in height and is likely
therefore to have been one of the original window openings. A further window on the
first floor of the western elevation could also be in its original opening; however, due
to the extensive alterations to this property, it is difficult to ascertain whether any of
the remainder of the windows are in their original openings.
The most significant Victorian feature of Parville is the tower joined to the west
elevation, which gives Parville its familiar profile in the landscape, Further Victorian
features are likely to include the front boundary wall and railings, plus the mouldings
above all of the windows on the south and west elevations which are aesthetically
pleasing as they fill in the wide space on the elevations between the first floor
windows and the bottom of the roof.
Unfortunately, many of the original features of Parville were removed during the
twentieth century and replaced with modern substitutes, These features included the
chimneypieces, doors, windows, architraves and cornices and today there are very few
original features remaining in the interior of the property.
The Lodge House
The Jodge is located on the main road in Ballabeg and is a small late-Victorian building
of unknown date. There is a property on this site in the 1869 Ordnance Survey Map
but it is a slightly different size and shape to the current building, however, it could be
the same property, only extended. The entrance adjacent to the lodge was not
created until after the 1869 Ordnance Survey map and the lodge house appears in the
census returns for 1901, although it was uninhabited at that time.
The Caroline Pettit Trustees have recently had the lodge house extended to the
designs of Anna Begbie, in order to provide adequate living accommodation (PA
03/01424/B).

The Garden
The extensive gardens slope upwards from the Main Roads towards Parville and are
some of the finest to be found in the Island. The main house is set back in the
grounds and therefore the open-space of the gardens contributes to the character of
Ballabeg.
An important feature of the gardens is the lake, which has a long narrow shape and is
fed by a nearby stream which runs through the eastern boundary of the garden. The
lake was also included on the Ordnance Survey Map of 1869 so it has been a feature
of the garden for a significant tength of time and has now become home to a small
number of ducks.
Garden walls
The house and garden are enclosed with a boundary wall constructed of slates and
round stones which appears to be of a considerable age and which matches the wall
enclosing the parish church on the opposite side of Ballagawne Road. However, at the
front of the property where the boundary meets the Main Road, the wall has been
lowered to half the height, rendered and cast iron railings have been placed along the
wall top. ‘The Elements of Style’ (1991) states that during the British Victorian period
"Wrought or cast-iron palisading was used to enclose the front gardens of villas.”
(p.269). This ironwork matches the pattern of the double gates which are Jocated at
the entrance adjacent to the lodge house. This entrance is not included on the 1869
Ordnance Survey map, so from this evidence we can deduce that the ironwork is
possibly a fate Victorian addition.
The 1869 Ordnance Survey Map suggests that at that time the garden was separated
from the house by a wall which ran from east to west. A section of this wall still
remains and is located to the south east of the main house, behind the greenhouse.
It is likely that the remainder of the wall was demolished when the lodge house was
constructed in order to provide access from this entrance to the main house.
The Outbuildings
There are some small outbuildings located north of the house which are now largely
used for garden purposes, They are constructed of timber and stone and although
they are attractive examples of their kind, they are of no great architectural
significance.
RECOMMENDATION
Parville is suggested for inclusion on the Protected Buildings Register for the following
reasons;
Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
Parville survives as an excellent example of late Georgian and further Victorian
improvement of a more ancient structure dating back to the 16" century.
oN

The estate is largely stil! intact, including the main house, the lodge, the walled
gardens and outbuildings. Only the stables or coach house have been lost and are
now under separate ownership.
Historic Interest
The estate of ‘Parville’ is of a significant age, dating back to at Jeast 1587 when it was
first referred to in the Manorial Roll and despite the property changing hands several
times throughout the following centuries, the original name has been retained.
Close Historic Association
There is a possible family connection between the Parr’s of Parville and Sir Thomas
Parr (b.1483, d.1517) of Kendal Castle and his daughter Queen Catherine Parr
(b.1512, d.1548) who was Henry VIII's sixth wife.
During their time at Parville many members of the Parr family heid religious posts in
Arbory and other parts of the Island. The most famous member of the Parr family
was Deemster John Parr (b.1651, d.1713), who was a MHK in 1679, Chaplain of
Ballure in 1688, Vicar of Rushen in 1691, Deemster in 1693 and Rector of Ballaugh in
1700, Most notably, in 1690 ‘Parr’s Abstract’ was published, which was his account of
the laws of the Isle of Man.
Other residents of Parville have included John Quillian (d.1768), the Attorney-General
of the Isle of Man who lived at Parville for a few years before his death. Another
resident was George Quirk, Water-Bailiff and Receiver-General for the Island who lived
at Parville during the early to mid-nineteenth century
Landmark Qualities
Parville has undoubted landmark value to Ballabeg, both historically and
architecturally. The property is located on an elevated site adjacent to the parish
church and the south-facing elevation and tower are clearly visible for miles around.
Age & Rarity
Parville survives as an excellent example of late Georgian and further Victorian
improvement of a more ancient structure dating back to the 16" century.

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
Books
Galloway S. (ed), 1991, The Elements of Style.
Gelling C.J., 1998, A History of the Manx Church 1698-1911. CL
Kitto J., 1990, Historic Homes of the Isle of Man.
Kniveton G.N. (ed), 1997, An Iifustrated Encyclopaedia of the Isfe of Man.
Articles
Kewley J.D.R., 2006, Parville — Some Notes for Registration Purposes.
Maps and Plans
Wood's Atlas, 1867, DoLGE.
Ordnance Survey Map, 1869, DoLGE.
Current digital map, DoLGE.
Photographs
Current photographs.
internet Sites
Manx Note Book website
www. isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook

PARVILLE |
:










iid
ee 4h
titah tid ou
iiEEEEES
U8
(iitidaigg
```
