# RB 266

Peel Police Station(formerly Peel Court House) Derby Road, Peel, IM5 1HH

## Parish
Peel

## Registration date
20/10/2014

## Extracted details
* Architects: Langton Dennis
* Builders: Macadam and Moore
* Construction: 23rd March 1892 – 1st May 1893
* Reasons for registration:
  - High quality design
  - Elizabethan/Flemish style not well represented in the Isle of Man
  - Condition good overall
  - Use of Ruabon brick with terracotta details and sculpture is exceptional
  - Terracotta sculpture of good quality
  - Only building by the architect Langton Dennis on the Isle of Man
  - Contextually important within Peel's townscape
  - Building is of historic and local interest
  - Adds to the collective group value of Queen Anne Revivalism and Arts & Crafts influences


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1346489/rb266-peel-police-station.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 12/00266/REGBLD
> a
infrastructure
planning and building control
bun-troggalys - plannal as gurneil troggal
DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (REGISTERED BUILDINGS) REGULATIONS 2013
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 9th June 2014, the Department of
Infrastructure, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and Regulations REGISTERED
Peel Police Station, (formerly Peel Court House), Derby Road, Peel, IM5 1HH.
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
‘THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Authority.
Dated this 20th October 2014,
By Order ofse enarmer
rormee
Ge
“CA Dudley
Deputy Secretary to the Planning Committee.
1° Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, @ building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(2) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013
5. _ Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
To: Property Owner — FILE COPY
Local Authority - PEEL, Town Hall, Derby Road, Peel, IMS 1RG
Director, Manx National Heritage
Isle Of Man Natural History & Antiquarian Society

Registered Building Appraisal
Derby Road Police Station
&
Former Court House
Peel
teen
IF
infrastructure
fing contro
bun-troggal nal 3s gurneil troggal
Building Conservation Section

REGISTERED BUILDING APPRAISAL
NAME: Former Court House/Pee! Police Station
ADDRESS: Derby Road, Peel
POST CODE: IMS 1HH
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Peel Commissioners
GRID REF: SC 24740, 84014
Introduction
‘The former court house which still functions as the local police station, is located
on the
Junction of Derby Road and Albany Road where it adjoins the grounds ofSt Germans Church.
(Plate 1 & 2) Stylistically the building can be dated to the latter part
of the 19" Century, and
together with its striking appearance and commanding location, the old court house stands out
amongst the predominantly Victorian vernacular of Peel.
General Historical Background
During the nineteenth century, the inadequacy of the old Court House positioned between
Castle Street and East Quay, now the Leece Museum (Plate
3) became increasingly apparent
and so it was decided that a replacement court house would be built. The design of the building
would form the basis
of an architectural competition where entrants submitted designs under a
pseudonym. The winning design selected was that by English architect Langton Dennis, ARIBA,
whilst Macadam and Moore were appointed as contractors/builders, the detailed plans being
‘submitted to Peel Town Commissioners and considered on the 23" March 1892. Approval to
‘commence was achieved within eight days and the works commenced. The completed building
was opened on the 1" May, 1893 (despite the date stone above the front door stating 1892)
by
His Honour Deemster Gill. The ceremony
was attended by members of the Manx Bar, the Peel
‘Town Commissioners and other dignitaries and their wives.

In 1955, part of the building became the Police Station and the Court function eventually
ceased in the late nineteen eighties and is now solely occupied by the Isle of Man Constabulary.
THE SITE
Located next
to the cathedral and close to the Commissioners’ Offices and the Corrin Hall, the
building is situated in the former northern corner of field 1706 (the cathedral Is in field 1703).
‘The3 %4 acre field, then owned by a Miss Amy Quirk was offered for auction in 1887. It had
reached £1070 when the auctioneer put in a reserve of £1,800 and consequently no sale was
affected. The field was subsequently divided into ‘seventy-two building plots as well as a larger
plot which the government were anxious to secure as the site of the new court house.’ (Plate 4)
By today’s standards the site Is quite cramped — police cars have to be parked elsewhere, and
lost property in a garage across the road. The former iron railings, made by John Pye of
Moreton-in-the-Marsh, Gloucestershire, which ringed the principle facades and were set on a
very low wall which serves to define the boundary, were unfortunately removed in the ‘sixties.
However, to the rear elevation, the site Is still bounded by the remnants of a small section of
railing along with a further section of railings, thought to be original (though with later
modifications/repairs) located above the cellar/prison cells. (Plate
5 & 6)
THE BUILDING
Designed by Langton Dennis in 1892, this attractive bullding with its eclectic mix of Elizabethan
windows and Flemish detailing falls within the broad ‘umbrella’ of what was to become known
of as ‘Queen Anne’. Seen asa response
to the rampant Gothic Revivalism of the period, the
Queen Anne style grew steadily from the mid 1800's and paralleled that of the emerging Arts &
‘Craft movement, both of which shared numerous design features particularly the use of
moulded terracotta
tiles. Though clearly not based on the actual Queen Anne period
of the early
1700's, the style did none the less borrow certain classical elements from that period along with
what was to become its trade mark feature, notably the pronounced and often intricate Dutch
inspired gables. (Plates 7 & 8) The examples referred to jointly display the predominant
use of
red Ruabon brick interspersed with red terracotta panels displaying ‘cast’ motifs.

Built in red Ruabon brick and with yellow/buff terracotta window sections, comiices and copings
from JC Edwards of Ruabon, it is extensively embellished with pinnacles, balustrading and
decorative sculptures and other detailing. Around the building there can be seen various
idiosyncratic features such as the interesting cornice detailing that supports one of the
downspouts along with the Manx themed rainwater hopper heads. (Plates, 910,811)
The surface texture of much of this detailing seems to suggest that the comice and other
elements are constructed from sandstone when in fact they are a moulded clay composite
«allled terracotta, made
to resemble sandstone. In this case the ‘buff’ colouring effect is partially
achieved through the firing process which, as seen here, can lead to under vitrification of the
surface resulting in a porous surface which can accelerate wear. Above the door, in the
keystone of the arched door case, is the date stone for 1892 and above the entablature, in the
parapet, is a Royal Coat of Arms also formed out of terracotta panels.
‘The green roofing slates came from LLwydcoed quarries, Penygraes,
Wales, whilst the
ventilator
with ornamental cupola
on the ridge of the court house
roof originally had a more
‘complex design that included a Norse galley weathervane — now replaced bya more modern
design. The cupola, often a common feature on civic buildings throughout this period, is
redolent of those employed on many Arts & Crafts inspired structures such as the Manx
Museum and Onchan village hall, the latter designed by Baillie Scott. (Plate 12) Each is distinct
in its own right stylistically, though collectively it serves to identify them within a shared
architectural genre.
Elsewhere the terracotta, as opposed to timber, windows with their terracotta mullions and
transoms, harmonise with the bullding’s overall theme and thanks to their durability have
avoided being replaced with uPVC units. The former main entrance facade, symmetrical in form,
has
a central doorway with heavy oak double doors, though now no longer used and now
sealed, originally they would have led directly into a corridor, now occupied by the general
office. (Plate 13)
‘The floor pian, (Plate 14)
@s published in The Builder of 1893 remains substantially unchanged,
the Judge's Room is now the Interview Room, the Advocates’ and Jury’s Rooms are for the
‘Sergeant and Inspector, the toilets on the left are now disabled toilets, whilst those on the right
are now the Kitchen, with the Witnesses’ Room becoming
the Staff (tea) Room. With regards
to
the internal furnishings, it was reported
at the time that the furniture was supplied bya George

\W. Kermode, of Peel, who probably also made the doors and door cases which are of particular
note.
To the rear of the court is now two half-height store rooms (tinted yellow on the drawing)
whilst the former ‘Dock’ and additional public seating
has been recently removed in order to
create an open area for storage, unfortunately at the cost of retaining the building's originality.
(Plate 15) This is due to the former court facllities no longer being required and subsequently
elements of the court room have now unfortunately been removed (2013), However, the
magistrate’s
elevated seating area has so far been retained, in addition to the doors and
impressive architraves along with the panelled enclosure surrounding the stairwell which leads
down to the cells. The court reportedly being the only courthouse in the Isle of Man with direct
stair access into
the court from the cells contained in the basement, an arrangement which was
apparently modelled on the Old Bailey, in London.
‘The basement/holding cells are reached via the wood panelled steps in the central Court Room
(tinted purple on the drawing). Descending the stairs into the basement of the court house
reveals the former holding cells, only one of which retains anything of its former semblance in
the form of its original door and now serves as a storeroom, Elsewhere
the other two cells have
been more extensively altered, retaining little evidence of their former functions. In general the
basement is now used for storage, toilets, changing room and a shower. (Plate 16)
The building is currently on the Department of Home Affairs Property Register together with the
Police Garage in Albany Road and maintenance, although departmental, comes under the
supervision of the cross-government Estate Management Forum.
‘THE ARCHITECT
Langton Dennis was born in Streatham, London in 1865, the son of a successful journalist. He
was articled to London architects, George and Peto. This very successful practice was headed
by Sir Earnest George, RA, who went on to become president
of the RIBA (1908-10) his office
becoming known as ‘The Eton of architects’ offices. It was perhaps here, in conjunction with
architectural trends of the period, that Dennis developed his own interpretation of the
developing ‘Queen Anne Style’ of architecture based upon his mentor’s evident bias for this
form of architecture as recorded bellow;

Their superbly conceived designs represent the extreme point of late Victorian
individualism, and were inspired by old Flemish and German town houses, sketched and
painted
in watercolour
so stylishly and evocatively
by George in his tours
of Europe.
Grainger, Hilary, George, Sir Ernest (1839-1922). The Oxford Dictionary
of National
Biography.
Whilst with George and Peto, Dennis studied at the Royal Academy Schools, and then became
an assistant to two other London architects before qualifying. He then appears to have entered
joint practice with two other architects, one in London and the second in Crowborough, Sussex,
where he seems to have settled down. He is last recorded in Who's Who in Architecture, 1926,
Which lists only one competition win under his name — that of the Peel Court House, though he
also entered another unsuccessfully with his London partner FH Tulloch, This was for St Pancras
Municipal Buildings in 1893, the year that Peel Court House was completed.
Conclusion:
«High quality design
‘* Elizabethan/Flemish style not well represented in the Isle of Man
* Condition good overall, though the interior, and in particular the former court room itself
has now been partially stripped out in 2013 which has compromised the authenticity of the
interior.
* The use of Ruabon brick with terracotta details and sculpture Is also exceptional in the Manx
context
* Terracotta sculpture of good quality, though there are elements of degradation occurring.
'* Only building by the architect Langton Dennis on the Isle
of Man
* Atrisk: There is an element that the current use of the building and its function, though
‘once specific to the needs of the police and judiciary has now been marginalised somewhat.
+ Despite having the cathedral and castle, Peel has few buildings of comparable quality.
Contextually important — St German's Cathedral, Corrin Hall, Town Hall, Centenary Centre
and the Court House are all in dose proximity, making a significant grouping within Peel's
townscape
© The building is of historic
and local interest.

+ Within the context of Queen Anne Revivalism and Arts & Crafts influences throughout the
island, Derby Road Police Station adds considerably to the collective group value.
Recommendation
Given this buildings unique architectural style and state of preservation, in conjunction with its
social and historical contribution to Peel, its preservation and registration would be a positive
contribution to the Island’s protected buildings register.
Derby Road Police Station and former Court House is recommended for addition to the
Protected Buildings Register
as it is considered significant
for its location, its quality and for its
group interest
as defined in Policy RB/1 — Registration of Buildings as set out in Planning Policy
Statement 1/01 - Policy
and Guidance Notes for the Conservation of the Historic Environment of
the Isle of Man:
ARCHITECTURAL INTEREST AND/OR AESTHETIC QUALITY: The register is intended to include
buildings which are of importance to the Island for the interest of their architectural designs,
decoration, craftsmanship, or by virtue of the eminence of the architect; this would include
important examples of particular building types and techniques (e.9. buildings displaying
technological innovation or virtuosity, as might be found in structures connected with the
historic railways of the Island) and significant plan forms;
This is an excellent example of the late 19th century Queen Anne style of architecture that.
remains a rich source of original period features having survived largely untouched and in good
condition, despite some minor maintenance Issues and changes to the main court room. It is,
as far as is known, the only building by Langton Dennis in the Isle of Man and set on the corner
of Derby Road, the building has both a commanding and open view of the immediate area.
‘Though other examples of this building genre survive here on the island, this example is a rare
example
of the Arts & Crafts inspired Queen Anne movement which in this instance has drawn
upon Elizabethan and Flemish elements, not uncommon for the period, but exceptional for the
Isle of Man. Overall it is an attractive enhancement to the more commonly established
Victoriana which predominates throughout Peel.
HISTORIC INTEREST: This includes buildings which illustrate important aspects of the Island’s
social, economic, cultural, religious, agricultural, industrial or military history; this importance

might also be assessed in the particular local context of the town or village in which the building
is located;
The historical role of this building is significant in terms of the role it has played in the social
history
of Peel.
LANDMARK QUALITIES: Some buildings will be clearly recognisable as having such qualities
whether they be located in isolated coastal or rural locations, or as focal points within a busy
local townscape;
Originally relocated from what was the ‘hub’ of Peel, its relocation to what was the periphery of
Peel has gradually become more centralised as the town around has expanded. (See Plate 4)
Sighted on the comer of Derby Road junction, the building occuples a commanding position
over the adjacent houses and the church grounds of St Germans.
GROUP VALUE: Especially where buildings comprise an important architectural or historic unity
or a fine example of planning (e.g. Squares, Terraces or Farm Groups).
(One of a significant collection of Queen inspired buildings here on the island, this particular
building encompasses a wide range of elements associated with the movement, some of which
are unique to the island. Whilst the majority of surviving examples are generally located in
Douglas, Derby Road Police Station stands out as a prime example of this genre in the West of
the island,

Derby Road Former Court House & Police Station

Map and Aerial view of Derby Road Police Station (highlighted)

The former Court House located on the quay, now the Leece Museum

‘The Expansion
of Peel 1869-2012
Derby Road Police Station & Court House highlighted pre and post construction

The extent of the remaining railings to the Derby Road site
Side elevation boundary wall and railings Rear elevation basement and railings which
exhibits the only remaining sections of railing.
Note replacement top sections

Period details of the Court House 1892 - 2013
This illustration, from The Builder, 23° September, 1893, describes Peel Court House as being
‘under construction’. Whilst the grounds are sketchy and bear little resemblance to the site we
see today, the building is substantially ‘as drawn’. The only significant built differences are the
absence of the decorative stone balls on the low wall to the side of the entrance steps, the
railings (since removed), some simplification of the lantern, and the window details — plain
glass rather than multi-pane.
‘An early photograph showing the Court House complete with railings.
(Leece Museum, undated)

Comparative images of the emergence of ‘Queen Anne’ architecture
of the late 1800's with their highly stylised gables and use of expressive Ruabon
brickwork and terracotta tiles.
Former Hanover Street School, Douglas.
Terracotta cast detailing forms the main
panel by the front entrance
Former Ridgeway Public House, Douglas
notable
for its Dutch inspired gables and
terracotta
panel of sunflowers - a highly
stylised image associated with both the
Arts & Crafts Movement and the Aesthetic
Movement:
Douglas main Post Office, in additionto
its use of Ruabon brick it is notable
for
its numerous moulded terracotta panels

Shared features between Derby Road Police Station and Douglas Railway
Station, Douglas
Pilasters and rounded gable details.
Douglas Railway Station
Peel Police Station front gable

Architectural detailing (1)
The Royal Coat of Arms: needed to mat So as 0H this hom. This shoul be simp to
replace, but care will be needed to match the colour. The background behind the Parapet has
been digitally removed in this photograph. The staining (or mould growth), not evident inthe
Cartier photographs, suggests that the facade may have been chemically cleaned in the late

Architectural detailing (2)
Pinnacle, north-east corner. Note the good ‘The keystone dated 1892. The block above
colour and condition of the green the string course was where the blue Police
Welsh slate. Light was fixed,
Pinnacle, north-east comer. Enlargement. Pilasters support the entablature of the
Note the detail and finish which gives the decorative arched capping to the gable. This
impression of a sandstone sculpture. and the steep-sided nature of the gable
contribute
a Flemish element to the
10

Architectural detailing (3)
Unusual terracotta moulding feature ‘Transom and mullion terracotta sections.
around down-spout. Note progressive degradation of surface
Note progressive degradation of surface
Rainwater hopper with distinctive three
legs motif
i

‘Comparative images highlighting the use of roof vents/cupolas in late 19th Century civic buildings
‘The Manx Museum, Douglas
Onchan Parish Hall
Langton originally designed the cupola surrounded by decorative details on all four corners of
‘the base. The modern sharp-edged scalloped flashing is very noticeable.
Peel Police Station
12

The main doors - now sealed, which led into the main corridor, now the front office.
The front office - formerly part of the main ‘The front desk - now approached
from
corridor leading off from the front entrance the side entrance
13

Serr. 23, 1893] THE BUILDER.
=
Here Jog Ran
a TM
ad te lr
th a re
‘Sule of ch
Zhe Fee Cart ent, 2 of BaP
Original Floor Plan as envisaged in 1893
sagen Jury Room
Benching Removed
- Toilets removed
a
Abvocnten -_.
‘Store rooms and door Heitehen
Main Entrance
Front Desk/Counter Main Of-
Former front door now sealed
Floor Plan Alterations/Amendments 1893 - 2013
14

View from the dock looking towards ‘View from the bench looking towards
the magistrates bench what was the dock (now removed 2013)
The judges bench ‘One of the fine examples of doors and frames
which all have the same treatment, witha
pulvinated moulding between doorcase and
entablature.
15

‘Stairwell down to the cells from the court room:
Last of the three cells with an
intact door.
Other cells have been
modified and lost their doors
16

REFERENCES AND SOURCES
BOOKS/THESES
Arts & Crafts Architecture. Davey. P. 1995
Gray, A Stuart (1985) Edwardian Architecture, A Biographical Dictionary. ISBN 0 7156 2141 6,
p.186.
Grainger, Hilary Joyce (1985) The architecture of Sir Ernest George and his partners, c. 1860-
1922, PhD thesis, University of Leeds. _http://etheses whiterose,ac.uk/239/
Grainger, Hilary: George, Sir Emest (1839-1922)." The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography.
Online ed.
GR. No.24/09 Council of Ministers Report: Management of Government owned property,
December 2009.
‘The Isle
of Man: Dearden. S & Hassell K. 1997
NEWSPAPERS
The Builder, (?), Harper, Roger H, Victorian Architectural Competitions, This is an Index
to
British & Irish Architectural Competitions, 1843 - 1900. The “E” at the beginning of an entry
‘means
that a design had been entered, but had not necessarily
been awarded a place.
The Builder, 23” September 1893, p227.
Daily Times, 7.2.1962, p10, in ‘Western Watchtower’
Isle of Man Weekly Times, 15.1.1985, p10.
Manx Independent, Tuesday 4” May 1993, p16.
Peel City Guardian, 6 Aug 1893.
Peel City Guardian (PCG), 27.8.1887, reproduced in PCG, 18.9.1871, p4.

ARCHIVES
BAL (British Architectural Library, RIBA) biographical data on the architect, and the text and
floor plan that accompanied the engraving in The Builder, 23 September 1893.
Leece Museum, photograph,
p9
Manx National Heritage, newspapers
cited in text; print of engraving
from The Builder.
MAPS
Asylum Map of 1862
Current Digital Map, Department of Infrastructure
Fannin’s Map of 1779
Ordnance Survey Map, 1869, Department of Infrastructure
Ordnance Survey Map 2009
Wood's Atlas, 1867
PHOTOGRAPHY
Tutt. P.
Wilson. T
‘TLW 2013/ P. Tutt 2012

ta Department of Infrastructure ~~
Isle of Man Planning and Building Control Division bertoggaie
Scale 1:511
3 195) 325
```
