# RB 263

The Banqueting Hall, Ballamoar Farm, Patrick Road, Patrick

## Parish
Patrick

## Registration date
19/01/2009

## Extracted details
* Construction: c.1750 – 1787
* Reasons for registration:
  - special architectural and historic interest
  - fine architectural details from the late eighteenth century
  - rare features such as the cool room and cock-fighting arena
  - relics of a forgotten age
  - close historical association with Sir George Moore
  - age and rarity


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/632801/0500263regbldformerbanquetinghous.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 08/00263/REGBLD
Isle of Man
Government
Retltys Ellan Vanni
DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 14th January 2009, the Department of
Local Government and the Environment, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Former Banqueting House Ballamoar Farm Patrick Road Patrick Village IMS 3AW
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Committee.
Dated this 19th January 2009,
By Order of the Department
~ EJ Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1 Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
To: Property Owner ~ FILE COPY
Clerk To Patrick Commissioners, Hall Caine Pavilion, Old Church Road, Crosby,
Director, Manx National Heritage

S2020SloLosouy
E24uopunBuisnpsonpoid
“sBuipsoud
jIA10Jouognoasoid
0}pes)AewpueyBuAdog
uMolg
saBuljul
uononpoides
pasuoujneuy
sdinp
“URWJO8S]
“UEWUOLAUT
OY]PUB
}USWIUJEAOS
[207jowawyedsg
jYyBuAdod
uMOID©
@
46/00
JequIN
eousory
“Burdew
Aeringue;Joals}Woy
peonpoide;
deyeseg
re
gezoee ones
gezoe
eBLoee
eBLoee
SLZOES
6LZ0ee
gBLcose
eLzoce
ggloce
gSLoce
Leoves
beepes
reine ntral
SBLoce
roped)
‘Sonag
oles
Stan
(
PIRKSARISy
6ELoce
pot
Vy|
FaayS
|ia\
boee
Sreres
youre|
everse
eplocebloce
geloes
OPLOES
cbLastoee
iadau/e9z00/80
syuewuog
6007
Auenuer
6T
jonjU09
Buipjing
pue
Buluejg
jo
Seiopsiq
JUSWUOJIAUG
3Y}PUB
JUSWUID/
*D[e907jO
JuDWLIedag
aq

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: Former Banqueting House at Ballamoar Farm
ADDRESS: Patrick Road, Patrick Village
POST CODE: IM5 3AW
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Patrick Commissioners
GRID REF: 249 822
Introduction
Ballamoar farm in Patrick is known for being the home of Sir George Moore, who was said to be
“one of the leading and most successful Manx merchants of the eighteenth century.”
(IOMNHAS, vol. 4, p. 641). He was also an MHK, Speaker of the House of Keys and the leader
of the Manx resistance against the Duke of Atholl’s proposal to give control of the Island to
Cumberland.
Sir George Moore came to Ballamoar c.1750. He rebuilt the old house, improved the land for
farming and also set about transforming the grounds into one of the first ornamental gardens
on the Island. The former banqueting house and circular arena in the grounds date from this
time and it has been said that Ballamoar was then a very popular social gathering place with
the gentry (IOM Examiner, 16/10/1953). The circular arena is believed to have been used for
cock-fighting, indicating the taste in sport during the late eighteenth century.
History
Ancient History of the Site
Ballamoar Farm is located on a site with an ancient history. Within the grounds are the remains
of a pre-Christian tumulus (grave mound), which is situated behind the present house. In
1930, P.M.C. Kermode described the tumulus as being "...about 70 yds. s.w. of the old house.”
(Kermode P.M.C., List of Manx Antiquities, 1930), the old house being in a different position to
the current dwelling. Larch Garrad wrote that in the eighteenth century the tumulus was being
used to provide a viewpoint of the estate, “This follows the usual seventeenth century practice
of offering a view both over the planted grounds and the surrounding countryside.” (Garrad
L.S., 2003, p.27).
The Moore Family
In c.1750 the estate was purchased by the wealthy merchant, George Moore. His father and
grandfather had also been merchants, with his grandfather Phillip Moore (1650-1728) moving
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 3 22" December 2008

to the Island from London and establishing a merchant business in Douglas (IOMNHAS, vol. 4).
Following Phillip Moore’s death, his business was carried on by his son, also called Phillip (1674-
1746), who married Margaret Bradshaw and had four sons, one of whom was George Moore
(Moore A.W., 1889).
Sir George Moore (1709-1787)
Sir George Moore was a merchant from his youth. In 1733 he married Catherine Callan, the
daughter of a Dublin merchant (IOMNHAS, vol. 4) and by 1750 he had set up his business in
Peel and purchased Ballamoar in nearby Patrick. He named the estate ‘Ballamoore’, meaning
‘Moore's Farm’, but since that time the spelling has changed to the more common ‘Ballamoar’,
meaning ‘Large Farm’ (Ballabeg’ is ‘Little Farm’).
Sir George was responsible for the creation of ornamental gardens at Ballamoar and also for
improving the farming of the estate, rebuilding the old house and the construction of the
banqueting house, which is the focus of this study. The entertainment facilities which Sir
George created at Ballamoar reportedly made the estate, “..a popular place with the gentry.
On the estate, still to be seen, there is a cock fighting pit, with a house which was used for
gaming adjoining. The cockpit is a perfectly formed arena made to accommodate some
hundreds of spectators.” (Isle of Man Examiner, 16/10/1953, p.7). Cock-fighting was a popular
sport with the British upper-classes before it was outlawed in England and Wales in 1835 and
Scotland in 1895.
With regard to Sir George’s merchant business in Peel, he owned ships which sailed to foreign
countries and he mainly dealt with spirits which had been imported to the Island, intended for
sale to smugglers. Eighteenth century Manx merchants are sometimes referred to as being
involved in the smuggling trade, although prior to the Act of Revestment in 1765, it was not
illegal to import such goods into the Island.
Sir George was elected to the House of Keys in 1755 and was appointed first Speaker of the
House from 1758 until his retirement at the end of 1779, which included the difficult years after
the 1765 Revestment. Following the Revestment, the Duke of Atholl proposed to give control
of the Island over to Cumberland. Sir George was the national leader of the Manx resistance
against this, and in 1781 he traveled to London with John Cosnahan where he addressed the
Bar of the House of Lords and secured recognition of Manx independence in the revised
Constitution (information from Kitto 1., 1990). It was during this trip to London that he
received his Knighthood.
Following Sir George's retirement in 1779, he had wished to present a silver mace to the House
of Keys. There is evidence that his plan had been carried out to a certain extent and that the
mace was delivered to him at Ballamoar in 1785. However, the mace is said to have never
reached the House of Keys and its whereabouts since 1785 are unknown. Sir George died in
1787 and is buried at Kirk Patrick.
Sir George Moore’s Gardens
During the late eighteenth century, Ballamoar was noted for its ornamental gardens, which
were created for Sir George Moore. Sir George put a great deal of time and effort into his
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 4 22" December 2008

gardens and used his sea-faring connections to import plants and trees from England and also
from further a field (Kniveton G.N. [ed.], 1997). He was assisted in his designs by Mr.
Stephenson, a garden planner from Ireland. The improvements to the estate included planting
an orchard with apple, pear and cherry trees, plus various trees laid out within the grounds and
the creation of a vinery, with red and white grape vines from the south of France (IOMNNHAS,
vol.4). When Sir George’s early attempts at apple growing were sabotaged by thieves, he
reportedly placed traps in his estate in order to prevent it from happening again and one of
these man traps from Ballamoar garden is now exhibited in the Manx Museum in Douglas
(IOMNHAS, vol.4).
Some of the most prominent features of the present gardens at Ballamoar are the eagles and
pineapples which adorn the gateposts and stand at the front of the house. These items are
relics from the time of Sir George Moore and he wrote of when he bought them in Bath in
August 1758, “When I was this summer in Bath I took a walk with my son to see Mr. Allan's
garden, on our way there we called in at a stone cutters. To look at and cheapen some stone
vases was my business and I bought and paid him for 2 eagles and 2 pomegranates [these
were actually pineapples] which with their pedestals he promised......to be ship’d at Bristole.”
(IOMNHAS, vol.4, p.662).
Sir George Moore’s Farming Improvements
Sir George was one of the pioneer scientific farmers in the Island during the late eighteenth
century. Other prominent farmers included the Bishop, the Duke of Atholl, Senhouse Wilson
from Farmhill and Deemster Crellin from Orrisdale.
With regard to farming improvements at Ballamoar, Sir George is said to have improved his
pastures during the 1950’s by growing red, white and yellow clover which he had imported from
London through his merchant connections (Manx Heritage Foundation, 1991). He also created
drainage and fencing, straightened out the boundary hedges and built the walls along the
roadside, which date from 1753-54.
Subsequent Owners of Ballamoar
Following the death of Sir George Moore in 1779, Ballamoar passed down the Moore family and
during the nineteenth century it was held by Philip Moore, Sir George’s grandson and a close
friend of the then Duke of Atholl. The night before the Tynwald ceremony the Duke was known
to stay at Ballamoar with his friend, travel to St. John’s the next day and return there to eat
afterwards (Manx Mercury, 23/07/1793 & 30/07/1793).
In 1838, Ballamoar was sold to Mr. Richardson of Liverpool for £7,800 (Manx Sun, 09/03/1838)
and it remained with the Richardson family until at least the time of Brown’s Directory of 1894.
Wood's Atlas of 1867 recorded Mr Richardson as the owner of the estate, spelt as ‘Ballamore’,
and the full size of his estate was then over 363 acres.
Following the Second World War, Ballamoar was farmed by an Icelander named Oddson before
it was purchased by the Anderson family in 1951, and it is currently owned by Mr David
Anderson MHK.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 5 22" December 2008

Architecture
The banqueting house in the grounds of Ballamoar dates from the time of Sir George Moore,
who owned the estate between 1750 and 1787 (Garrad L.S., 2003). When he purchased the
estate it was a modest Manx farmhouse; "The dwelling was small, consisting of a parlour, 3
closets with beds, and an upstairs room.” (IOMNHAS, vol.4, p.652). The Moore family had
initially intended the property to be their summer residence, but Sir George’s wife enjoyed living
there so much that it was soon decided to make the property their main home. Subsequently,
the small dwelling was replaced with a much larger house, with "...@ hundred foot frontage”
(Garrad L.S., 2003, p.5) and the grounds were transformed, with the addition of the banqueting
hall and cock-pit arena, creating a substantial gentleman’s residence.
The house built for Sir George was where his grandson Phillip had entertained the Duke of
Atholl on the night before the Tynwaid ceremony. This dwelling no longer stands, although it
was still in use at the time of the 1869 County Series Map, but was replaced with the present
farmhouse during the late nineteenth century. The area where the old house and formal
gardens were located is now overgrown, but the site can still be identified.
Also at Ballamoar there is an old mill which once belonged to the estate. In 1976 the old mill
building was converted into a family home known as Mullen Beg, and the story was covered by
Manx Life magazine in their September/October 1978 issue.
Banqueting House
The building in the garden which is the focus of this study has been described as being a
“Banqueting House” (Garrad L.S., 2003, p.24), which were fashionable in Britain during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. A banqueting house was a separate building located
within the grounds of a large dwelling, whose purpose was purely for entertaining guests away
from the formalities of the main house and without being disturbed. It is not known exactly
what activities took place inside the banqueting house, but in later years it is said to have
contained a billiard table (Garrad L.S., 2003). The banqueting house is located in a sunken
circular arena, which was formerly used as a cock fighting pit, a very popular leisure activity of
the late eighteenth century.
The banqueting house has similarities with one described by Francis Bacon in his essay titled
“Of Gardens” written in 1625. Bacon described how he thought the garden of a gentleman’s
residence should be taid out and stated that the grounds should include “..some fine
banqueting-house, with some chimneys neatly cast, and without too much glass.” (Bacon F.,
1625). This description is similar to that at Ballamoar, which could suggest that Sir George
consulted with this essay when the plans for creating his new ornamental gardens were made.
The idea of not having “too much glass”
in the building was likely to be in order to protect the
occupants from weather conditions and also to offer a degree of privacy.
The building is two storeys tall and rectangular shaped, with a central porch, a pitched roof and
a chimneystack at either gable end. Despite the building having two floors, the external ground
level alters so that both floors are accessed from the exterior and there is therefore no internal
staircase linking the two levels. The walls to the lower ground level and porch are constructed
with natural slate stones. In contrast to this, the walls to the upper floor and chimneystacks
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 6 22"! December 2008

are constructed with red clay bricks, which are clad externally with vertical hanging slate tiles
(this was in order to provide the porous bricks with a form of protection). The roof covering is
natural slate tiles.
There is a possibility that the red bricks used in the construction of the upper floor of the
banqueting house were made on site. This is due to the fact that there was an attempt at
brick-making at Ballamoar during the late eighteenth century from the clay deposits found in
the estate, but this came to a stop when the Liverpool born brick-maker returned to his home
town (IOMNHAS, vol.4).
The lower ground floor of the building has a wide entranceway facing eastwards, towards
where the old house was located, which suggests that this level was formerly used as a coach
house by Sir George’s guests. The lower level of the porch has a small, single entrance-way
with a vaulted ceiling and has the appearance of being a cool room, where wine and food
would have been kept on-site for the occupants of the banqueting house. Sir George's
merchant connections and his attempts at growing grapes at Ballamoar further support the idea
that there would have been a wine and food storage area here.
The upper floor was undoubtedly where the main entertaining took place. Banqueting houses
were sometimes richly decorated and the upper floor of that at Ballamoar is no exception, with
the remains of many architectural features such as a grand porch entrance, a decorative
cornice, a high curved ceiling, a ‘Palladian’ style arched window and a large fireplace.
Currently, the building is in need of restoration and the area has become overgrown. There is
damage to the roof and the glass in the windows is gone, leaving much of the interior exposed
to the elements. In addition to this, some of the vertical slates have come off the exterior,
leaving the red brick underneath with little protection.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 22" December 2008

RECOMMENDATION
The former Banqueting House at Ballamoar Farm, Patrick is suggested for inclusion on the
Protected Buildings Register for the following reasons;
Architectural Interest and/or Aesthetic Quality
e The building has the remains of many fine architectural details from the fate eighteenth
century, including a decorative cornice, curved ceiling and ‘Palladian’ style window.
e There are also rare features, such as the cool room underneath the porch and the
surrounding cock-fighting arena.
Historic Interest
e Both the banqueting house and cock-fighting arena are relics of a forgotten age when
the upper classes used to participate in these activities.
Close Historical Association
e The banqueting house was built for Sir George Moore, MHK, Speaker of the House of
Keys, prominent merchant and farmer. Sir George was the leader of the Manx
opposition to the proposal by the Duke of Atholl to hand over control of the Island to
Cumberland and he successfully secured Manx independence in the revised Constitution
when he addressed the House of Lords in 1781.
Age and Rarity
« Due to the fact that it dates from the late eighteenth century, the age of the building
would be enough to merit it worthy of Registration.
e Surviving banqueting houses are not that common, even less so in the Isle of Man. It is
understood that the only other Banqueting Hall is that at Hango Hill in Castletown which
is not in anywhere near as good a state of preservation as this example.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 8 22" December 2008

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
Books and Articles
Bacon F., 1625, Of Gardens.
Draper P., 1864, The House of Stanley ~ Edward Tenth Earl of Derby.
Garrad L.S., 2003, The Manx Garden (A History of Manx Gardens’ 1985, updated).
Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society Proceedings, Vol.4, pp.640-662.
Information about Sir George Moore.
Journal of the Manx Museum, Vol. 5, p.38, The Lost Mace of the House of Keys’.
Kermode P.M.C., 1930, List of Manx Antiquities - Patrick.
Kitte 3., 1990, Historic Homes of the Isle of Man.
Kniveton G.N. (ed.), 1997, An Ilustrated Encyclopedia of the Isle of Man.
Manx Heritage Foundation, 1991, Manx Farming and Country Life 1700-1900.
Manx Life, September/October 1978, p.21. Ballamoar Mill.
Mann Today, May 1986, p.48. Homes in History — Ballamoar, Patrick.
Moore A.W., 1889, Manx Families — Moore’s of the Hills.
Moore A.W., 1901, Manx Worthies ~ George Moore, Knight (b. 1709, d. 1787).
Woodfield P., 1991, Early Buildings in Gardens in England (Edited by Brown A.C., University of
Essex Arts and Humanities).
Newspapers
Some historical events reported in local newspapers, in chronological order;
e Manx Mercury, 19/02/1793 (there is a conflict with this date and the connection to Sir
George Moore, as he died in 1787). Sir George Moore grows turnips at Ballamoore.
e Manx Mercury, 23/07/1793. The Duke of Atholl visits Philip Moore Esq. at his seat of
Ballamoore.
e Manx Mercury, 30/07/1793. The Duke of Atholl goes to Tynwald from Ballamoore, the
home of Philip Moore Esq., and afterwards returns and dines there.
e Manx Advertiser, 17/10/1812. To be let, Ballamoore, in the hands of Philip Moore
(grandson of Sir George Moore).
e Manx Gazette 15/06/1815. Philip Moore died at Peel (aged 41).
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 9 22" December 2008

e Manx Sun, 09/09/1836. Estate of Ballamoore for sale by private sale.
e Manx Sun, 09/03/1838. Mr. Richardson Esq., of Rodney Street, Liverpool buys
Ballamoore for £7,800.
Isle of Man Examiner, 16/10/1953, p.7. A tour through Patrick.
Directories
1823 Pigot’s. Philip Moore Esq., Ballamoore
1837 Pigot’s. Gentry and Clergy ~ Mrs, Margaret Moore, Ballamoar
1843 Pigot and Slater's. Gentry and Clergy ~ Mr. Richardson, Ballamoar
1846 Slater's. Gentry and Clergy — Mr. Richardson, Ballamoar
1894 Brown's. Richardson R., owner of Ballamoar
Maps and Plans
1867 Wood's Atlas, DLGE
1869 County Series map, DLGE
Current digital mapping and serial photography, DLGE
Internet Sites
Manx Note Book website
www. isie-of-man.com/manxnotebook
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 10 22" December 2008
```
