# RB 255

The Old Rectory, Andreas Village

## Parish
Andreas

## Registration date
02/05/2009

## Extracted details
* Architects: James Cowle
* Construction: 1663 – 1886
* Reasons for registration:
  - important historic and religious site
  - archaeologically significant site
  - benefit from further investigation and recording
  - 1886 extensions and alterations by Diocesan Architect James Cowle
  - important building in the village context
  - rectory in a dilapidated condition


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/631511/0500255regbldandreasrectory.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 07/00255/REGBLD
Isle of Man
Government
Reiltys Ellan Vannin
DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 31st March 2009, the Department of
Local Government and the Environment, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Andreas Rectory Andreas Village Isle Of Man IM7 4EZ
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the
PROTECTEDBUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Committee.
Dated this 2" April 2009,
By Order of the Department
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
To: Property Owner ~ FILE COPY
Ballavarran Farm , Jurby, IM7 3AN,
Director, Manx National Heritage
Isle Of Man Natural History & Antiquarian Society

mi
One 0.03 aod
Base Map TSproduced fran the isle of Man Stivey Mapping,
SUGEEST eenog Humber Gogasg Wh Copyright, Department
sae” Of Local Sovernment and the Environment, Isle of Man.
oe Reproduotan brotbitedWithout orlor BEIMissigg,
cups: Produced.using Unifoem 7.3 of DLGE Murray House, Mount bey

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: The Old Rectory
ADDRESS: Andreas Village, Kirk Andreas.
POST CODE: IM7 4EZ
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Andreas Parish Commissioners
GRID REF: 414 994
INTRODUCTION
The Old Rectory in Kirk Andreas is built on a site which goes a long way back in Manx history.
The first Rector of Andreas was appointed in 1188 A.D. and the Andreas Rector was usually also
the Archdeacon (second only to the Bishop) and therefore, historically the site had a high
religious status.
There are various historical written accounts which mention the rectory and some of these even
include brief a description of the building. Unfortunately, however these records do not always
agree with each other and it has therefore been difficult to establish exactly what part of the
site was built.at what time and what the age is of the oldest buildings which remain.
The buildings on the site which we are interested in for the purpose of Registration, include the
remaining parts of the house and an adjacent barn. The house is constructed with red brick
and six different types of red brick have been discovered on the site, with the oldest example
dating back to possibly the seventeenth century and contemporary with examples found at the
nearby site of a civil war fort south west of the church. The barn has been built mainly with red
brick and there has also been some slate used in the construction of part of the outer wall.
Discoveries on site which appear to pre-date the present dwelling include numerous red
sandstone parts (not Peel sandstone), a timer section believed to be part of a Medieval
mullioned window and the remains of a leaded, diamond paned window.
HISTORICAL INTEREST AND ASSOCIATION
Early History
The Island’s parishes were established in the twelfth century when the best church (or keeil)
sites were chosen in each parish. The selected churches were often those with the greatest
antiquity or religious status and they were not chosen for their easy access (for example Patrick
Church was located on St. Patrick’s Isle), although Andreas Church is located centrally in the
parish.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 3

There are only three parishes which have Rectories (Andreas, Ballaugh and Bride) and the
remaining parishes have Vicarages. Andreas Rectory was also usually home of the Archdeacon
(some accounts have implied that certain Rectors of Ballaugh also held the Archdeaconry) and it
was therefore a residential dwelling with a very high status. It has been said that during the
time of the Lord’s of Man, the position of Archdeacon was often reserved for Chaplains of the
Earl of Derby (Moore R.B., 1999), who sometimes also held positions in England and therefore
they may not have lived full time in the parish.
The first Rector of Andreas was appointed in 1188 A.D. He was named Deremod (old Gaelic
Diarmid, modern Gaelic Kermode) and it has been said that his early rectory survived until 1645
when Samuel Rutter was Archdeacon of Man (Kitto J., 1990, p.101). Although Kitto claims the
early rectory was built at the time of archdeacon Deremod, it is impossible to establish when it
was actually built. It is probably thought that the dwelling survived up until the time of
Archdeacon Samuel Rutter because the subsequent Archdeacon, Jonathan Fletcher built a new
house on the site in 1663.
In 1351 the Church Council ruled that "..every parish church shall have a properly built dwelling
nearby, in which the bishop, archdeacon and their ordinaries can be received and
entertained...”
(Bray G., 2004, p.57). This call for glebe houses stipulated that the properties
were to be erected and maintained at the expense of the rectors and vicars of each parish.
However, despite this ruling, some of these properties were still not built or were kept in a very
poor condition.
Seventeenth Century
Blundell's ‘History of the Isle of Man’ (1648-1656) refers to Andreas Rectory at the time Samuel
Rutter was Archdeacon. '"A// ye clergy there [in the Island] have very sufficient meanes to
maintaine them. Mr. Rutter had at my being there a living w’ ye Manksmen told mee was of
fourscore pounds p. annum. I suppose it to bee ye parsonage of Andrew, w’ Mr. Chaloner saith
belongeth to ye archdeacon, but now it seemeth there being no more archdeacons admitted,
that title is with ye bishops extinguished, and now a curate supplieth the place”.
A later reference in Manx Note Book states that Samuel Rutter "does not appear to have ever
resided in that parish [Andreas].” (1886, vol.2, no.8). The earlier extract from Blundell does
not state for certain whether or not Samuel Rutter actually lived at Andreas Rectory, only that
the writer supposed it to be his residence as he was informed it was the home of the
Archdeacon.
John Feltnam, who visited the Isle of Man in 1797 and 1798, referred to two periods of
construction at Andreas Rectory. Firstly, “Rev. Jonathan Fletcher from 1660 to 1669, Chaplain
to the Earl of Derby, died at Knowlesly. He built the old brick house in Kirk Andreas, 1663.”
and secondly, "Rev. John Lomax, from 1691 to 1695, having the curacy of Buzzy in Lancashire:
he built the new house adjoining to the old one in Kirk Andreas.” (Feltnam J., 1798, p. 158).
Feltham’s earlier date of 1663 can be assumed as a likely date for construction of a new
rectory, as documents from 1662 prove there was an Archdeacon’s residence in Andreas at that
time, which appears to have been in a dilapidated condition. The documents were addressed to
the Coroner of Ayre Sheading from the Governor Henry Nowell. In the first document it was
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 4

stated that, "You are hereby required to impannell six sufficient and understanding men that
have in-sight in buildings as well for ye walls as the ruffle, glass, windows, or other materials or
ornaments belongeinge or ought to belonge to ye delapidations of ye houses of ye
Archdeaconrye in Kk. Andreas & yt ye sam be performed and brought in to remaine upon
Record by the 29° day of ye month & this as you and they will ansswere the contrarye at yr
Pri, given under my hand at Castle Rushin ye 2d day of Mar : 1662.” The subsequent
document to the Coroner says, "You are to take notice yt ye Jury to be impanelled is for the
inquiry of ye delapidations of the Archdeacons houses, & nothing at all of the buildings at the
Loyall fort wch otherwise shall be taken care of & not by the Jury aforesaide.” The location of
the “Loyall fort”is not known. There is a mound to the south west of the churchyard which is
said to be the site of a Civil War fort, and although little is known about it, red bricks have been
discovered at the site which match the oldest type discovered at the rectory.
In 1677 a report was made of the rectory and John Kitto refers to this in his book ‘Historic
Homes of the Isle of Man’ (1990), Due to the date it was written, this account must have
referred to the dwelling built for Archdeacon Jonathan Fletcher in 1663. The report is
fascinating, as it offers a description of a seventeenth century large Manx house with status,
rather than the more traditional farm house. Further details of this account are discussed later
in this report.
An Act was passed in 1697 called ‘Act against Non-Residence’ and its purpose was to ensure
there was a clergy house built in every parish. The Act insisted that the Island's Clergy had to
reside in the Island "upon their ecclesiastical livings”. Presumably, prior to this some of the
rectors and vicars did not reside in their respective parishes, or even in the Island and some of
the parishes were therefore still without clergy houses.
Eighteenth Century
Following the 1697 ‘Act against Non-Residence’, in 1734 it was recorded that "..severa/ of the
vicarages and one of the rectories of this isle have not for some ages past had any houses for
the incumbents to reside in, and some others are in a ruinous condition...” (Gray G., 2004,
p.178). As a result of this, a further Act was passed by Tynwaid in 1734 to encourage repairs
to the properties by guaranteeing that any vicar or rector who invested his own money into the
glebe house would be given back two-thirds of the sum which he has paid by his successors (or
his executors would).
The 1734 Act was followed by a Visitation to each of the Island’s parishes by Bishop Mark
Hildesley in 1757. One of the questions asked to each parish was, "The Mansion House and
Out Houses Rectorial and Vicarial ~- Whether in due repair or decent order or not?” With regard
to Andreas Rectory, it was said that "7he slate part of the Mansion house wants pointing ~ the
stable and barn in good repair - the Brewhouse wants thatching ~ a Cowhouse and kiln
formerly belonging to the Rectory are gone to ruin” (Manx National Heritage). It is not known
what the "s/ate part of the Mansion house” actually was, as the current house is constructed
with brick and written accounts refer to the seventeenth century buildings as also being brick
built (however, the remains of a wail thought to have belonged to the 1663 house has some
slates constructed in the lower part and an old barn has slates and beach boulders in part of its
external walls). The reference to various other buildings on the site emphasises the scale of the
rectory at this time and the derelict kiln could have been where the red bricks were fired.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 5

Another note at the time of the Visitation said that the "Gable of the mansion house adjoining
the thatched house made up with boards but insufficient as certified by wardens.” These
“hoards” referred to are puzzling, although they may simply have been an attempt at timber
cladding in order to keep the weather away from the porous red bricks.
In his ‘Diocesan History’ (1893), A.W. Moore claims that in 1762, during the time of Bishop
Hildesley (1755-1772), Andreas church was repaired “and the rectory, which was in ruins,
rebuilt’. This is the only known reference which claims that the rectory was rebuilt at this time,
as all others refer to seventeenth and nineteenth century buildings. The Archdeacon in 1762
was William Mylrea and it has been claimed that the previous Archdeacon, John Kippax (Rector
1727-1760) had not actually lived at the Rectory (Braddan Church website). The author of the
‘Diocesan History’, A.W. Moore, was a Manx antiquity from Cronkbourne in Braddan. He was
son of William Fine Moore and nephew of Archdeacon Joseph Christian Moore (Rector 1844-
1886), so there was a family connection to the site which adds support to his account that the
rectory was rebuilt in 1762. In addition to this, the historic buildings adviser Peter de
Figueiredo visited the Old Rectory in November 2007 and in his follow-up report he states that
the oldest part of the present dwelling appears to be eighteenth century, which would tie in
with this 1762 date.
Nineteenth Century
Benjamin Philpot became Archdeacon in 1832. He thought “Andreas Rectory was too small for
his family and servants, so he rented Braust.” (Gelling C.J., 1998, p.67). The Rectory was
instead used to accommodate divinity students, as a theological college and it became known
as the “Minor Prophet’s House” (Gelling C.J., 1998, p.67). The Archdeacon farmed the glebe
lands and kept sheep, cows, horses, pigs and poultry.
A severe storm in January 1839 damaged the rectory. The archdeacon was at Braust with his
family at the time and he wrote the following notes about that event, “Zhe Rectory, the Minor
Prophet's house, on account of a recent ordination, only contained at the moment a married
candidate from London with his wife and two children. He, M. H--, paid a man 5s. to crawl his
way to me at Braust and ask me to come to them as they were in extreme danger. I paid the
man to go back again and assure Mr, H—that when the safety of my own ten children and their
mother were secured I would go to him if I could. Eventually I reached the Rectory with
difficulty and found part of it in ruins. The maidservants had just got up when a big chimney
stack fell through the roof and carried their bed through the floor”. (Bradley A.G., 1923).
Benjamin Philpot resigned in 1839 and John Cecil Hail became the next Archdeacon, On
arriving in Andreas, John Cecil Hall found the rectory house to be in a poor condition and he
subsequently initiated an Act of Tynwald, established on 20" December 1840, which enabled
him to repair the rectory house at his own expense (Harrison W., 1879). Johnson’s Guide of
1850 claims that the rectory was almost entirely rebuilt at this time and the new road fram the
village to the church was laid-out, bypassing the route through the rectory, "7he Glebe-house,
which was very old, suffered severely from the great storm of January 6” 1839. It has,
however, been almost entirely rebuilt, in a very tasteful style; by the Venerable Archdeacon
Hall, the present Rector, who has added a handsome conservatory, contributing greatly to the
elegance of the mansion. He has also constructed, at his own expense, a new road, for the
accommodation of the parishioners residing to the north of the Church, and who had formerly
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 6

no access to it but by a narrow avenue passing between the house and the stables, now
reserved as a private approach”.
A plan of the rectory from 1839 shows the new road to the church created for Archdeacon John
Cecil Hall. This plan is confusing as it shows the location of a house and a separate outbuilding
on the site, which are roughly where they appear on the 1869 Ordnance Survey map, but the
footprint of the house is noticeably different with the front elevation appearing to face east
rather than south. However, Peter de Figueiredo believes that this 1839 plan must be incorrect,
as it doesnot show the seventeenth century wing which existed at that time, or the old
outbuilding the south west of the old house, so it is therefore possible that the purpose of the
plan was to show landholdings, with the precise layout of the buildings not being important. It
is likely that this plan was a proposal which was not fully developed. The road to the church
was shown on the plan and it was created at approximately the same time the map was drawn,
so it could have been a proposal showing a suggested new route and position of a new
dwelling. This can be further supported by the layout of the dwelling, which appears to be
facing east, giving it a favourable view from the new road where most of the parishioners would
pass by.
In 1844, Joseph Christian Moore became rector and archdeacon after John Cecil Hall. Joseph
Christian Moore was the eldest son of James Moore of Cronkbourne in Braddan. Archdeacon
Moore inherited Cronkbourne Village, the sailcloth factory and Cronkbourne House following the
death of his father in 1846, but as he was Archdeacon and had no interest in the site, he sold
the business to his brother William Fine Moore. Archdeacon Moore had substantial private
means and during his period in Andreas he restored and extended the rectory, which he found
to be in a poor condition (Gelling C.J., 1998), although this seems rather soon after the 1840
repairs to the dwelling. Joseph Christian Moore-also partially restored the parish~church and
built its tower.
Joseph Christian Moore died in 1886 and the subsequent Archdeacon was Dr. Joshua Hughes-
Games. He became rector in June of that year but did not take up residence until August, after
various alterations had been made to the property (Gelling C.J., 1998). Evidence of these 1886
alterations and extensions can be seen in plans and a specification of works by the architect
James Cowle from Dougias.
Twentieth Century to Present Day (2009)
In 1938 the church wanted to sell the estate at auction, but the villagers objected to the sale of
"their" rectory and prevented the sale from going ahead. The rectory was requisitioned by the
RAF in 1939 and used as an officer's mess for Andreas Airfield during the Second World War.
Following the War the rectory was leased to the Youth Hostel Association and it was returned to
church use in 1953. At this time the rectory was reduced in size and modernised, with the old
1663 house (then the kitchen extension) being demolished, Most of the farm buildings were
also demolished, leaving just one remaining barn. The church authorities sealed off the 1886
Victorian extension from the main house and it was sub-let.
The Old Rectory was inhabited by the parish rector until September 1978, following the
retirement of Archdeacon Glass (Manx Star 28/12/1979). At this time, the property was in a
poor condition and in need of repair. Plans were submitted by the Parochial Church Council to
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 7

modernise and improve the rectory, but these were rejected by the Church Commissioners who
decided to sell the property, including the Clerk's Glebe house and two adjacent fields and use
the proceeds to build a new rectory elsewhere in the village. The following extract is from the
Manx Star newspaper highlighting the Parochial Church Councils views on the matter (28"
December 1979, p.6);
"The P.C.C. has all along stressed the need for the rector to live in the village, as did
the ‘Diocesan Needs and Resources Commission’. Our proposals could have allowed
him to reside in the rectory soon after his induction.”
“Instead the Church Commissioners have chosen to totally ignore the P.C.C.S
wishes and intend to sel, not only the Rectory and its grounds, but also the Clerk's
Glabe House, and two fields which adjoin the church and graveyard. Out of the
proceeds of these sales they wish to build a new rectory, thus continuing the
present unsatisfactory state of affairs for another two to three years.”
“The P.C.C. strongly questions the wisdom of those manoeuvres — taken against
local opinion and advice ~ which will deprive the Manx Church of one of the finest
houses in the parish, if not in the Island - and asks how many more fine residences
are to be abandoned by the Church before wiser counsels prevail?”
Despite the opposition from the Parochial Church Council and the inevitable outrage by the
villagers, the Church Council sold the Old Rectory in 1982. The first private owners, David and
Valerie Stile’s have remained proprietors to this day and the sale was recorded in the Isle of
Man Examiner on 12" February 1982 (p.22).
ARCHITECTURAL INTEREST
There are few remaining old Manx houses of importance that little is known about them and
therefore, the Rectory remains largely a mystery. A rectory would have differed from most
domestic Manx architecture because in addition to family rooms, it would have needed formal
rooms and perhaps even accommodation for the Bishop when he visited. It was also a high-
status site, so there was access to good quality building materiais and construction workers,
which were out of reach of most domestic dwellings.
On first sight, the dwelling appears to have two markedly different periods of construction. The
older part of the property resembles a large Manx farmhouse. It is three storeys tall and has a
five bay, south facing front elevation with a central door. The dwelling is two rooms deep and
has a central staircase with chimneystacks at either gable end. There is a single storey rear
addition to the property and the staircase seems to have been turned around at lower level and
extended into this extension to face a rear entrance, rather than the traditional style of facing
the front door on the south-facing elevation. The newer part of the property has a late
Victorian appearance with much higher floor to ceilings than the farmhouse section. This wing
was built in 1886, It has two storeys and is only one room deep, with the dimension sizes for
the rooms being much larger than in the older house. Also built at this time was a gothic-style
porch addition which faces northwards, moving the main entrance again.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 8

Red Brick Construction
The rectory is constructed in red brick. The owner of the property, David Stiles, has identified
six different types of red brick on the site, with the oldest being 2.5 inches thick and dating
from the seventeenth century. There are no stone quarries in the north of the Island and
transporting construction materials to the site would have been challenging both over land and
by sea, due to the poor condition of the early roads and the distance from the coast.
Due to the lack of local materials available, brick would have been perfect for building as it
could be made on site, perhaps by imported craftsmen. The use of brick on the site dates back
to at least the seventeenth century, but there is no evidence of an actual brickworks in Andreas
until the late nineteenth century, so it is highly likely that the earlier brick was fired on site.
During the 1757 Bishop's Visitation to the Old Rectory, a reference was made to the "..k//n
formerly belonging to the rectory...” which had "..gone to ruin® The site of this old kiln
mentioned in the Visitation has not been discovered, but perhaps this was the kiln which fired
the bricks used in the construction of the earlier property. A schedule of works from 1886 for
the proposed extension wrote that the walls were to be built "with wel! burnt brick from the
neighbouring kilns” (architect James Cowle, 1886). This is likely to be a reference to Ballacorey
Brickworks in Andreas (est. 1851).
Red brick material has recently been unearthed at the nearby seventeenth century Civil War
Fort and there may be a connection between the fort and the rectory, due to their proximity
and the historical importance of the two sites. On a trip to the rectory in 2003, Andrew
Johnson from the Manx Museum identified which of the various red brick-types used at the
rectory is similar to that found at the Fort.
1663 House
Little is known about the earliest dwelling on the site, only that it was replaced by a brick house
around 1663, which was built for Archdeacon Jonathan Fletcher. The Archdeacon had an
enormous amount of power and could generate the wealth to build a grand house. A
description of the rectory taken from an Inventory made in 1677 indicates that it was a
relatively large dwelling for the time, consisting of five rooms with various luxury items. The
rooms included the "7hie Mooar” (living area), the "Greinnagh” (sunny place / drawing room),
the "“Chamyr” (study), the "Chamyr Seose” (main bedroom) and the "Chamyr Beg” (small
bedroom). "The Thie Mooar served as a common room, refectory and kitchen, and held two
long trestle tables, a small round table, two cupboards, a linen press, two armchairs, a settle,
two chests and several stools, with spinning wheels for flax, hemp and wool. The Chamyr had
an oak table, a chest, a settle, two armchairs and several stools, and the Chamyr Seose and
Chamyr Beg had wooden bedsteads with feather mattresses, chests and stools. The Thie
Mooar was flagged, and the usual practise was to cover the flags each morning with fresh
rushes after sweeping out and burning those used the day before. The other rooms had green
velvet curtains and carpets. In the Thie Mooar there was a big chiollagh, or open hearth and
chimney, on which the cooking was done, and the social life of the household centred in this
room beside the fire of peat and wood. Clocks were scarce, and a sundial was relied upon for a
record of the time by the household, while for the information of outside workers bells were
tung in the early morning, at noon, and at the hour for ceasing field work. The rectory estate
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 9

included a small farm with cattle, horses, sheep, poultry and bees to supply the household, and
the rector also kept a fishing-boat at the Lhen beach.” (Kitto J., 1990, p.101).
It is believed that the 1663 building was the property located directly to the rear (or north) of
the 1886 section of the house, which was demolished in 1953. One of the reasons for this
belief is that the property had a north-south long axis along the old road from the north to the
church and this would have been the preferred position of such a property from this time.
When later additions to the property were built, aspect had become a much more important
factor and these sections were south facing, away from the road. A further argument for this
section being the 1663 building is because plans of the property dating from 1953 show there
was a very large chiollagh (fireplace) in one of the rooms on the ground floor, and such a
feature was described in the Inventory of 1677. However, it is not possible to be absolutely
certain about the location of the older house as large chiollaghs were a common feature in
many old Manx dwellings and the 1869 County Series map shows there were many other
buildings on the site at that time. The dwelling described in 1677 had five rooms and if this
was the 1663 building, it would have needed a ground floor extension to accommodate the
rooms mentioned in the Inventory, with the two bedrooms being located upstairs. It is difficult
to imagine how the plan of the building would have worked, due to the various alterations
which have taken place over the years and the high status of the site, which means that the
property would have differed from a typical dwelling.
Gelling wrote in ‘A History of the Manx Church’ (1998) that Andreas Rectory “was rebuilt in
1666 and although added to and altered it remains basically the same building’ (1998, p.17).
However, it is now thought that there is little constructed in 1663 (or even 1666 as he refers to)
which still exists. The main part which survives is the north facing gable wall, which owes it
existence to the fact that it was incorporated into the rear of the 1886 extension, so it remained
in place when the rest of the old house was demolished in 1953. There are marks in the
brickwork which show where the older wall adjoins the 1886 building, and here in this old wall
we find the most interesting and unusual features of the site, undiscovered until excavated by
the current owners. These are two small arched Medieval-style brick recesses set into what
would have been the interior of the south-facing gable wal! at ground floor or basement level.
These appear to be shelves, although it is possible they were once window openings. Archive
photographs and plans of the building dating from before the 1886 extension was built show
that there was once a projecting chimneystack on the exterior of this gable wail. We can only
assume that these recesses or window openings pre-date this chimneystack. Even the
existence of a staircase shown on the interior of this wall in a pian dating from 1886 does not
explain the location of this external stack. The upper part of this wall is rendered and the
owners have been in the process of removing the render, so perhaps further discoveries are still
to be made in the old gable.
Other discoveries include the lower portion of the western elevation, which faces onto the old
road to the church. The construction of this wall shows slate stones near to the ground with
ted bricks above and the top has been levelled off, giving the appearance of a garden wall. The
wall is identified as being part of the old house by the existence of a blocked up window in what
would have been the wine cellar. This window opening is not very old in the context of this
site, as it was created in 1886 which is recorded in plans and a specification of works for
alterations and extensions to the rectory by the architect James Cowle, “Make window opening
into new wine cellar where shown”.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 10

Also discovered on site are the remains of a tiled floor on the ground where the old house
would have been. In the Inventory of 1677, the floor in the Thie Mooar was said to be flagged
and it is possible that there are some remains of this floor today. However, another explanation
can be found in notes made by the architect James Cowle in 1886, who wrote that the present
conservatory was to be taken down and "7he floor of the wine cellar to be made from the old
flags in conservatory” The "wine cellar”
at that time was the section of the old house closest
to the surviving gable and there are stone steps down to the cellar, which can still be seen to
this day. Various pieces of broken glass from old wine bottles have also been found on the site.
c.1690’s House
Between 1691 and 1695 a new brick-built house is believed to have been constructed for
Archdeacon John Lomax, who "“bui/t the new house, adjoining the old brick house in Kk.
Andreas” (John Thos. Clarke, Curate of Andreas, 1826 and also Feltham J., 1798).
It has been thought that the 1690’s house still exists, although altered and extended to become
the present house. However, there are arguments for and against this case. Some references
claim that the 1690's house still exists (at least to some extent), another reference states the
rectory was rebuilt in 1762 and there is also strong evidence that the dwelling was altered in
1840.
The dwelling is currently in the process of having much of its internal plaster and external
render removed, so the bare brickwork has been exposed. There does not seem to be much
evidence which would date the property to the 1690's, however, the remains of a Medieval
timber mullioned window have been discovered in a window opening in the first floor bathroom.
It is possible that this window could have been moved here and reused from an older dwelling
on the site, but it is unlikely in an 1840's house of this status.
1762 House
It was claimed by A.W. Moore in the Diocesan History (1893) that by 1762 the rectory was in
ruins and it was subsequently rebuilt. There is architectural evidence to suggest that the
current property dates from this time, but there are no other written accounts which have the
same opinion. In fact, Feltham, who visited the Isle of Man in 1797 and 1798, only wrote about
two seventeenth century buildings on the site. However, it is not known if Feltham paid a visit
to the rectory or from where he sourced his information. A.W. Moore had a family connection
with the site (his uncle was Archdeacon Joseph Christian Moore), so this adds weight to his
claim that the house was rebuilt in 1762.
The historic buildings adviser, Peter de Figueiredo believes that the house shows architectural
evidence that it dates from the eighteenth century, as opposed to the seventeenth or
nineteenth centuries. This architectural evidence includes mid-eighteenth century joinery, such
as "the upper flights of the staircase, some of the doorcases on the first floor and a small
panelled screen and door that enclose the central first floor room from the staircase well.” (De
Figueiredo P., 2007). He also claims that these items of joinery may not be in their original
position, but they are likely to have always belonged to this wing of the rectory. The floor to
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer ll

ceiling heights and window openings are also typical of an eighteenth century dwelling, with
nineteenth century dwellings having higher ceilings and larger window openings.
Peter de Figueiredo believes that the only uncertainty about the dwelling dating to the
eighteenth century is the Roman Cement which has been applied to the exterior of the house.
Roman Cement was first used in 1794 and became widespread during the early to mid
nineteenth century, so if this was the original finishing, the property must date from the
nineteenth century. However, this render is also found on the 1886 extension, so it could well
have been applied at a later date. The architect James Cowle’s specification of works for the
alterations and extensions in 1886 stated that, "Zhe whole of the external face of the new walls
to be cemented with Portland cement used with sand in the proportion of two clean sharp sand
to one of cement”,
Perhaps another uncertainty as to the property dating to the seventeenth century is the fact
that when Benjamin Philpot became Archdeacon in 1832, he thought that "Andreas Rectory was
too small for his family and servants, so he rented Braust.” (Gelling C.3., 1998, p.67), with the
rectory becoming the Minor Prophet's House. This is further supported by notes by Benjamin
Philpot himself, transcribed in ‘Our Centenarian Grandfather’ (1923) by A.G. Bradley.
Archdeacon Philpot and his wife had ten children, so they would have required many servants
and a substantial house in which to accommodate everyone. The farmhouse at Braust is
approximately the same size as the old part of the rectory, although the dimension sizes such
as the floor to ceiling heights and window openings are larger at Braust, suggesting it is the
more modern of the two dwellings. At the old part of the Rectory there are marks in the
brickwork on the inner gable walis, which imply that at some point in the past the roof was
raised. Perhaps, Benjamin Philpot came to Andreas prior to this extension and although it is not
known exactly when the work was carried out, historical records have referred to substantial
repairs which were carried out in 1840, after Archdeacon Philpot resigned.
c.1840’s House
Archdeacon John Cecil Hall became rector of Andreas in 1839 and after finding the dwelling in a
poor condition following the storm in January of the year, he founded the ‘Andreas Rectory Act’
on 1840. Archdeacon Hall "..recited that the rectory had fallen into decay and was unsuitable
as the parson’s residence....However, largely out of his own funds he repaired the building and
then lived in it.” (Manx Star, 1980, p.4). It is said that he had substantial private means and
spent a considerable amount of money “..in the repair of the rectory house.” (Harrison W.,
1879). Johnson's Guide from 1850 states that the rectory was “a/most entirely rebuilt”
at this
time, so there are conflicting accounts to the extent of the works carried out.
The removal of plaster from the inside of the two gable walls at second floor level has revealed
marks in the brickwork, which suggest that at some point in the past the roof has been raised.
There is a small window high up on the eastern gable of the old house which has been blocked
up on the inside, but it has been discovered on the second floor level. This window has the
appearance of a small loft opening and it is a mystery why such a small opening would be
needed here, unless it can be explained by the view that this level was once loft space prior to
the roof being raised.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 12

Photographs dating from before 1886 show there was a large conservatory located where the
1886 extension was later built. This conservatory was described in Johnson's Guide from 1850
as “handsome...contributing greatly to the elegance of the mansion” There are still scars of
this conservatory on the former outside wall of the old house which is now an internal wall.
1886 Extension
The next significant building phase occurred in 1886 when the late-Victorian extension was
added. This included a large two-storey extension with a three-window front elevation and a
gothic style porch, which then became the main entrance of the house. The extensions were
designed by James Cowle from Douglas who was the Diocesan Architect and also a builder. He
is most famous for designing the old Isle of Man Prison on Victoria Road and Douglas Railway
Station.
1953 Alterations
The RAF requisitioned the estate in 1938 and following this, it was leased to the YHA before
being returned to the church in 1953. Existing plans of the rectory were made at this time and
various alterations were carried out, including the demolition of some of the old farm buildings
and what was believed to be the old house dating from 1663, which had become mainly a
kitchen and cellar extension. In addition to this, the 1886 Victorian extension was sealed off
from the remainder of the house and let, with the older part of the house continuing to be used
as a rectory until 1978.
Present day
The present owners, the Stile’s, bought the property from the Church in 1982. They are the
first private owners of the Old Rectory. The house is currently in a dilapidated condition and is
urgently in need of repair. The ultimate goal of the Stiles’ would be to restore the property to
its former glory.
The Outbuildings
The majority of the old farm outbuildings were demolished during the 1953 alterations, with
only one now remaining. This barn is located on the opposite side of the old road to the church
than the house and it had taken its current form by the time of the 1869 Ordnance Survey Map,
although there are marks in the walls which show a much earlier phase of construction. This
earlier build appears to be a small, single storey building with a steeply pitched roof, but it
seems to have been too small to have been the original house (certainly too small to have been
the house referred to in the 1677 Inventory). The construction of this older building has used a
mixture of slates, beach stones and bricks, with the lower portion of the old gable wall
appearing to be built entirely with beach boulders. The upper part of the old gable wall has a
mixture of slates and bricks, with the side elevation on the east (the western elevation has been
previously removed for garage doors) being constructed entirely with slates. Later extensions
to the barn were added both in height and length and they were built with brick, so are easy to
distinguish from the earlier build. There could have once been other buildings adjoining this
barn, but they were removed at least by the time the Ordnance Survey map of 1869 was
surveyed.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 13

The barn is important to consider in the Registration of the old Rectory, due to its significant
age and prominent location on the old road to the church. In addition to this, the current
owners have discovered the remains of a seemingly old diamond panelled leaded window in this
barn and further investigations could reveal even more pieces of historical interest.
CONCLUSION
The Old Rectory in Andreas is clearly a historic site of some importance. It has been difficult to
provide an exact date for the construction of the remaining buildings, due to contradictions in
documentary sources and various alterations which have taken place.
It is proposed that the Old Rectory and the adjacent old barn marked in red on the map should
be included on the Protected Buildings Register for the following reasons,
*
It is an important historic and religious site. It was formerly the Archdeacon’s residence,
one of only three Rectories in the Island and the first rector of Andreas was appointed in
1188 A.D.
It is an archaeologically significant site. Similar red bricks were found at the nearby
seventeenth century Civil War fort and the remains of a Medieval timber muilioned
window and an old diamond panelled leaded window have also been discovered.
The site would benefit from further investigation and recording.
The 1886 extensions and alterations were designed by the Diocesan Architect James
Cowle. He was the architect for the old Isle of Man prison on Victoria Road and Douglas
Railway Station.
It is a rectory and an important building in the village context at the very least.
The rectory has been unoccupied for a number of years and it is now in a dilapidated
condition. Registration would offer protection and Conservation Grants towards repairs.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 14

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
BOOKS AND ARTICLES
Blundell W., (1648-1656), A History of the Isle of Man (later edited by William Harrison for the
Manx Society).
Bradley A.G., 1923, Our Centenarian Grandfather, Chapters 12 and 13, Isle of Man, (from the
autobiography of the Rev. Benjamin Philpot 1790-1890).
Bray G., 2004, Councils and Convocations of the Diocese of Sodor and Man 1229-1877 (Beeson
Divinity School, Samford University, Birmingham AL, USA).
Brunskill R.W., 1971, J/ustrated Handbook of Vernacular Architecture, Faber and Faber
Limited, London.
Cannell S., 2001, Rural Architecture in the North of the Isle of Man.
Clarke J.T. (Curate of Andreas), 1826, Transcribed from an old paper containing a catalogue of
the names of Archdeacons in the Isle of Man from 1660 to 1826.
Feltham J., 1798, A Tour through the Island of Man in 1797 and 1798.
Gelling C.J., 1998, A History of the Manx Church 1600-1911.
Harrison W., 1879, An Account of the Diocese of Sodor and Man (for the Manx Society).
Isle of Man Examiner, 12 February 1982, p.22 (Andreas Rectory bought by David and Valerie
Stiles).
Johnson's Guide, 1847.
Johnson’s Guide, 1850.
Kitto J., 1990, Historic Homes of the Isle of Man, Executive Publications, Braddan, Isle of Man.
Leech’s Guide and Directory of the Isle of Man, 1861.
Manx Star, 28"° December 1979, Future of Andreas Rectory, p.6. (Manx National Heritage,
Library ref MN 200).
Manx Star, 4 April 1980, p.4, Andreas Rectory — History Repeats Itself, p.4. (Manx National
Heritage, Library ref MN 201).
Moore A.W., 1893, Diocesan History.
Moore R.B., 1999, Kirk Andreas (Sky!! Andrea} — Memoir.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 15

MAPS AND PLANS
1839, Plan of the Rectory of Andreas, The Reverend Archdeacon Hall, Rector.
1869 Series Ordnance Survey Map, Manx National Heritage.
Existing Plans of Rectory at Kirk Andreas, Isle of Man. W.T. Quayle, architect. April 1953.
OTHER SOURCES
Information from David Stiles (the owner since 1982).
Archive photographs (property of David Stiles).
De Figueiredo P., November 2007, The Old Rectory, Kirk Andreas, Isle of Man, Architectural
Historical Appraisal, DLGE.
Notes of the Visitation of Bishop Mark Hildesley in 1757; Manx National Heritage.
A Manx Note Book website, www.isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook.
e Unpublished documents from the Governor Henry Nowell to the Coroner of Ayre were
taken from here.
Braddan Church website, www.gumbley.net
« Claim that John Kippax (Archdeacon 1727-1760) had not lived at Andreas Rectory.
Current photographs and site visits.
Stephen Moore, Building Conservation Officer 16
```
