# RB 287

Groudle Glen Hotel, King Edward Road

## Parish
Onchan

## Registration date
15/10/2019

## Extracted details
* Architects: M. H. Baillie Scott
* Builders: Richard Maltby Broadbent
* Construction: 1893 – 1893
* Reasons for registration:
  - important surviving building of the Groudle Glen
  - surviving building associated with a Glenside development


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1365721/rb287-groudle-glen-hotel-for-website-151019.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 19/00287/REGBLD
x
Isle
of Man
Government
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, FOOD AND
AGRICULTURE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (REGISTERED BUILDINGS)
REGULATIONS 2013
IN ACCORDANCE with Part 3 14(2) of the Act, The Department of Environment, Food and
Agriculture on the 3rd April 2019 determined for entry,
Groudle Glen Hotel King Edward Road Onchan Isle Of Man IM3 2JY
as identified on the Register Entry Summary hereto attached, on to its PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER.
As required under Schedule 2 2(1) of the Act the Department HEREBY GIVES NOTICE that
WITH IMMEDIATE EFFECT the demolition, alteration or extension of the building is
prohibited in any way which would affect its character as a building of special architectural
or historic interest UNLESS written consent is first sought under 15(2) of the Act (‘registered
building consent”) and the authorised works are executed in accordance with the terms of
that consent and any conditions attached to it.
Dated this 16th April 2019,
By Order of the Department
ae
For and on behalf of the Director, Planning and Building Control
Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control Directorate, Murray House,
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IMI 2SF. Tel 685950 email planning@gov.im

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Scheduie Z
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications
of entries on register etc.
2.(1) As soon as may be (practical) after a building has been entered in the register, or the
register has been amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a
notice on the owner and the occupier of the building stating that It has been entered in or
removed from the register.
2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building
which has been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building
from the register-
(a) within the prescribed period after service
on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013
5. _ Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
Notices sent to:
Property Owner
Local Authority - ONCHAN, Onchan Commisioners Office, Main Road, Onchan,
Director, Manx National Heritage
Secretary, Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society
The Isle of Man Victorian Society
Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control Directorate, Murray House, Mount
Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email planning@gov.im

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning & Building Control Directorate, Murray House, 
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Email planning@gov.im. Tel 01624 685950 
 
 
 
 
Groudle Glen Hotel, King Edward Road, Onchan, IM3 2JY 
The Protected Buildings Register: Entry Summary 
 
This Building is included in The Protected Buildings Register, a 
register of buildings of special architectural or historic interest 
under the Town And Country Planning Act 1999 as amended for 
its special architectural or historic interest. 
 
Name: Groudle Glen Hotel 
Register Entry Number:RB 
 
Location 
Groudle Glen Hotel, King Edward Road, Onchan, IM3 2JY 
 
Parish: Onchan 
 
Date first registered:  
 
Register entry description 
 
Summary of Principal Building(s) 
A former Hotel constructed in 1893 in an Arts and Crafts style 
and attributed to renowned Arts and Crafts Architect M. H. Ballie 
Scott for Richard Maltby Broadbent to provide accommodation for 
visitors to the Glen. 
 
Reasons for Registration 
The Groudle Glen Hotel, King Edward Road, Onchan is 
recommended for entry into the Protected Buildings Register for 
the following reasons: 
 

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning & Building Control Directorate, Murray House, 
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Email planning@gov.im. Tel 01624 685950 
●HISTORIC INTEREST:  
* The Groudle Glen Hotel is an important surviving building of the 
Groudle Glen, a 19th century pleasure glen developed by Richard 
Maltlby Broadbent for the developing tourist industry. 
●Age and rarity:  
*The Groudle Glen Hotel is a surviving building associated with a 
Glenside development created as part of the island’s 19th century 
tourist industry. 
 
History 
  The Groudle Hotel is located on the Douglas to Laxey coast 
road, at the entrance to Groudle Glen.  The glen was established 
in 1893 by Richard Maltby Broadbent, the director of the Palace 
Company.  Mr Broadbent was keen to take advantage of the 
benefit of the newly constructed Douglas-Laxey Electric railway. 
Broadbent applied to the licensing court in July 1893 when the 
hotel was still under construction.  The roof had been built but 
the windows had not yet been added and there were still 
decorative works to be done.  The licence was granted and the 
hotel opened in August 1893. 
 
In 1894 the Douglas and Laxey Coast Electric Tramway Limited 
doubled its track to Groudle Glen and completed its route to 
Laxey; also that year the hotel’s distinctive wooden veranda was 
constructed. The glen was famous for being the home of polar 
bears and sea lions, which were kept at the seaward end of the 
valley. 
 
The Groudle Hotel has been attributed to Baillie Scott as at the 
same time of the hotel’s construction, Ballie Scott was designing 
Ivydene, in Little Switzerland for Richard Maltby Broadbent. 
 
There is no documentary evidence to prove that the Groudle 
Hotel was designed by Baillie Scott. The Building is thought to be 
the work of Scott due to the connections with Mr Broadbent, as it 
has been suggested it would have been unlikely that he would 
have employed two architects at the same time, it has also been 
documented in Slater’s 1995 book that “a Miss Denver, who was 

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning & Building Control Directorate, Murray House, 
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Email planning@gov.im. Tel 01624 685950 
the daughter of the licensees of the hotel during the inter-war 
period, was told by Mr R.G. Shannon, an accountant for an estate 
company during the same period, that Baillie Scott undertook the 
commission”.   
 
The Groudle Hotel reached its peak in the late 1970’s, due to a 
popular and friendly landlady, known affectionately as ‘Ma’. 
 
The hotel was refurbished during the early 1980’s and a 
restaurant was added. 
 
Details 
A former Hotel constructed in 1893 in an Arts and Crafts style 
attributed to renowned Arts and Crafts Architect M. H. Ballie 
Scott for Richard Maltby Broadbent to provide accommodation for 
visitors to the Glen. 
 
Materials: 
Rough cast render, hanging tiles, timber windows under pantiled 
roof with brick stacks. 
 
Plan: 
The building is rectangular in plan form of two storeys plus 
dormered attic to the front with additional lower ground floor to 
the rear. The building sits on the roadside of a sloping site with 
the rear projecting onto the sloping glenside. 
 
Exterior: 
The roadside elevation has projecting rendered veranda with 
piers, balustrade and rail underbuilt at ground floor with three 
centrally placed chamfered mullioned windows with leaded lights 
with two centrally placed opening toplights. Eastern most bay 
part recessed to original building line with timber door part 
glazed flanked by sidelights in timber frame.  Part projected but 
recessed containing double doors. Western most bay recessed 
double doors continuing westwards to a flat roofed toilet block 
with six small casement windows and door.  At first floor 3 oriel 
windows with leaded lights directly under eaves, eastern most 

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning & Building Control Directorate, Murray House, 
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Email planning@gov.im. Tel 01624 685950 
window built out to form bay flanked by timber door with four 
panels and top leaded lighted panel. End bays contain oriel 
windows positioned lower than central three with rendered panel 
below eaves, above timber leaded lights, eastern most window 
has oriel brackets still in situ. Each end of the elevation contains 
detailed scrolled console brackets with leaf motif.  Hipped roof 
with deep set eaves now covered in pantiles two flat roofed 
dormers to front not equal in size, larger dormer to eastern end 
with brick stack above.  
 
The Glenside elevation, three flat roofed dormers with brick stack 
above eastern most dormer, scrolled console brackets under 
eaves and under jettied first floor, leaf detail upon upper bracket 
and triskelion at ground continuous bay with timber casement 
windows, hanging tiles below at first and ground floor at either 
end. At first floor central bay window with timber casement 
flanked on both sides by mullioned windows between bays. At 
ground floor central bay replaced with projection extension up to 
western bay window. At lower ground floor recessed door to 
eastern side, projecting ground floor extension above central 
lower ground floor. 
 
Eastern elevation continuous bay with timber casement windows 
and hanging tiles under hipped roof. Western elevation hipped 
single storey and later flat roofed extension, large brick stack 
projecting from hipped roof of principle building 
 
Interior: 
Altered but not inspected. 
 
Subsidiary Features: None 
 
Please note: Descriptions annexed to the entry in the register 
may draw attention to features of particular interest or value, but 
they are not exhaustive. 
 
Selected Sources 
Isle of Man Victorian Society, No.35, Autumn 1993. 

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning & Building Control Directorate, Murray House, 
Mount Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Email planning@gov.im. Tel 01624 685950 
 
Cubbon S., 1997, Manx Inns – A pub Crawl Through History. 
 
Dearden S. and Hassell K., 1996, The Isle of Man, A Postcard Tour – Volume 
Two, Douglas and the East. 
 
Jessopp A., 1995, Isle of Man Pub & Brewery Guide. 
 
Slater G.J., 1995, Mackay Hugh Baillie Scott, An Architectural History. 
 
Map: For Identification  purposes only 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
End of Official Register Entry 
 

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture
RECORDING OF MINISTERIAL DECISION IN RESPECT OF A REGISTERED
BUILDING
Date: 21 August 2019
File Number: 19/00510/CON
Subject: Assessment of the application to remove the Groudle Glen Hotel
from the Protected Buildings Register
[Complete relevant boxes as appropriate Yes [No |N/A
Does the proposal comply with the principles of the Government | Yes
Strategic Plan? |
Government Policy and Aim We will have a built
and natural
environment which is
enjoyed and nurtured
by all for the future
Departmental Policy and Aim Promote the value and
utilisation of our
amenity, cultural and
| landscape resources
‘Appropriate regulatory consultation taken place? | Yes
Resource/Personnel Implications No
Finance Director support obtained WA
‘Treasury Concurrence required NA
Tnter-Departmental Implications No
Priority Level (High, Medium, Low) High
Responsible Department Officer Name: Jennifer Chance
Title: Director, Planning & Building Control
DECISION(S) REQUIRED:-
The Department is invited to consider the content of the attached report, and is
recommended to:
Refuse the application to remove the Groudle Glen Hotel from the Protected Buildings
Register.

Application iv De-Register tive Groudle Gien Hotel, Kind Edward Road, Onchan,
M3 23Y
Application reference 19/00510/CON
i.
i
2
21
2.2
23
24
25
2.6
27
Introduction and Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to consider the application to remove the Groudle Glen
Hotel from the Protected Buildings Register.
Background
On 1 February this year, the Department issued a Notice of Proposal to Registera
Building with respect to the Groudle Glen following a meeting of the Policy and
Strategy Committee on 9 January.
‘Comment was invited from the owner/occupier, the Local Authority, Manx National
Heritage, Victorian Society and the Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian
Society (JOMNHAS).
Representations supporting the registration were submitted by Manx National
Heritage, IOMNHAS, Groudle Glen Railway, Manx Electric Railway Society, Isle of
Man Steam Railway Supporters’ Association and a private individual.
Detailed comments were received from the owner who objected to the proposals as
did Onchan District Commissioners whose concern related mainly to restrictions on
future maintenance works and is in need for remedial works and they do not
consider there to be sufficient architectural or historic interest.
Manx National Heritage supported the registration stating that the building is very
likely to be the work of Baillie Scott but regardless of this the hotel is of special
interest as being representative of the development in the infrastructure of the Glen
and of Victorian tourism, Groudle Glen being one of a number of ‘micro resorts’ with
Groudle Glen being the best and the most surviving compared to Glen Maye, Glen
Helen or Port Soderick with the Hotel being an important element of the micro resort.
IOMNHAS also supports registration considering the building to reflect the historic
development of the Manx Electric railway and Groudle Glen as a tourist attraction,
also considered it to be by Baillie Scott. Support for registration was also received
from three heritage transport groups, Groudle Glen Railway, Manx Electric Railway
Society and Isle of Man Steam Railway Supporters’ Association their support can be
summarised as the building being an intrinsic part of the Glen and associated tourism
and associated transport.
‘The Owner of the building is opposed to the registration stating that: the building
has been vacant for many years; they are unable to sell the building; there is no
substantive documentary evidence exists to link the building to Baillie Scott;
registering the building will devalue all other buildings on the list. Later architectural
historians who have published on Baillie Scott have not referenced the building.
2

28
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
Slater's evidence from Miss Denver is flawed. The building was not considered during
the review of his buildings for registration on 1995/6. The Groudle was not raised by
Manx National Heritage or considered for registration when the Majestic Hote! that.
was Baillie Scott's first major work was demolished. There are examples of Baillie
‘Scott’s work that remain in their original form such as the Red House. The building
has been altered to such an extent and is in poor condition that it is not of special
interest.
The Assessment of the building considered three main issues; whether it is the work
of Baillie Scott; the extent of alteration and the significance of the Groudle Glen
resort,
The work Baillie Scott:
While the building is clearly designed in the Arts and Crafts style and there are
elements that can be seen in other work by Balllie Scott's there is no documentary
evidence to categorically state the bullding was designed by Mackay Hugh Baillie
Scott. Manx National Heritage is of the view that the building is very likely to be by
Baillie Scott. That attribution is not sufficient to warrant registration alone. If there
were evidence, it would warrant registration alone.
Extent of Alteration:
Alteration has occurred both externally and internally. Externally the introduction of
a wooden veranda in late 19” Century and then a solid veranda possibly in the
1950's. Although not part of the original design and the building has had a veranda
since its construction with the exception of part of its first year. There is a single
storey side extension and the roof has been replaced from normal clay tiles to pan
tiles, the larger dormer has been extended. To the Glen-side elevation there have
been alterations to the openings at lower ground floor and the addition of a
projecting extension at ground floor. The building does however maintain a number
of distinctive architectural features including bay and oriel windows, chimney stacks,
detailed brackets and is clearly still identifiable as the building in the historic photos.
Internally it would appear the building has been considerably altered, the principal
staircase remains and does limited amounts of coving. Internally the building is of
limited interest however those remaining features such as the staircase are.
Significance of the Resort:
The Glen was developed as a resort and the bullding, irrespective of designer, was
constructed in 1893 by Richard Maltby Broadbent at the entrance to the Glen.
Groudle Glen is more intact than other resorts, an important element of that (the
hotel) survives at the entrance to the Glen and adjacent to the Manx Electric Railway.
It is my view that the Groudle Glen Hotel as part of the Groudle Glen resort and
associated transport network is of special historic interest to the island.
It was agreed to register the Groudle Glen Hotel. This was formally done on 16 April
2019. A copy of the Registration is attached.

3.
3.1
The Application to De-Register the Building
The application to de-register the building was submitted on 2 May 2019. The
reasons for the application are summarised below.
(i) The building came to the attention of the Department following an application to
demolish it and re-develop the site. The basis for its consideration at that time was
that It was attributable to MH Baillie Scott. As there Is no documentary evidence to
substantiate this, the basis of the entry shifted to being one of ‘historic interest’ due
to its age and rarity and relationship with the tourist industry and the development of
Groudle Glen. Such a basis was considered without prior notice to the Owner.
(i) The building Is redundant because its use as a hotel, public house and restaurant
are not viable. It has been on the market for 5 years with no interest. Visitors to
the building peaked in the late 1970s and drink driving laws sounded a death knell.
Off Island visitor numbers are not sufficient to make the building viable. For an
historic building to take a meaningful place in modem times it needs to remain
relevant and have a viable use. This is not the case with this Building.
(ji) Onerous drainage covenants attached to building means that no-one will take it
on. Being Registered will reduce the chances of finding a buyer to nil.
(iv) The building has suffered cruel disfigurements over the last 100 year both
internally and externally. Almost all external and internal walls have been altered
with many windows replaced and any originals have had poor quality replaces or are
in advanced decay. The building requires substantial financial investment which the
owner does not have. Would the Department like to make an offer? The applicant
repeats her offer for the decision makers to visit the property to make an internal
inspection.
(v) The applicant asks why consideration is being given to registration now, the
Department should have shown interest 40 years ago. The building is long past its
best, its usefulness and relevance. Its removal would allow crucial re-development.
(vi) If the Registration is due to the Glen and its links with the tourist industry then
why are the waterwheel and development by the Sea Lions Rocks not listed.
(vil) The tourist industry, even allowing for interest in the electric railway is not
sufficient to sustain an interest in the building. The private sector will not invest in
this history and the building has no future unless Government is prepared to step in
and restore it to its former glory and run it as part of Manx National Heritage.
(vill) The report upon which the Department made its decision is not public and
therefore it is not known to what extent the Department had regard to
representations made by the owner. Nor is it apparent how the Department arrived
4

4
41
4.2
43
at its conclusion that the building Is of historic interest due to its age and rarity.
(ix) The owner believes the building does not have any special historic interest and
that it is in a poor condition and beyond economic refurbishment. Due to the level of
deterioration, it does not contribute to its current setting and its registration is a
serious impediment to the beneficial development of the building.
(x) If the building were allowed to be demolished the owner would undertake to
maintain a record of the building and the part it played in the development of the
area.
Representations
Representations are on the file and on line, however the comments received are
summarised below.
Onchan District Commissioners (11 June 2019): Recommend approval of the
application.
The Isle of Man Victorian Society (4 June 2019): The Society was formed in 1977
with purpose of promoting Victorian and Edwardian arts, architecture and crafts. It
has been accepted as a party to proceedings on many occasions and have a
particular interest in this matter. The Society therefore applies to be treated as an
interested party. They state that they are not aware of any regulations approved by
‘Tynwald to overrule this section.
The Society strongly objects to the application to de-register the building. There has
been no change in circumstances since the Registration. The representation lists a
large number of consistencies in design and execution between the Groudle Glen
Hotel and many other Baillie Scott properties. They state that circumstantial evidence
is accepted by courts and used in successful prosecutions. They also cite what they
describe as direct evidence in that a former licensee's daughter confirmed that Baillie
Scott was the architect of the Hotel.
Many of the reasons given for de-registration are not relevant (drainage system,
viability of a public house or restaurant, inability to sell). The reason for the request
is a desire to demolish the property and benefit from a site value if planning
permission was obtained for redevelopment.
Hotel was built specifically to act as the terminus hotel for what was intended to be
the end of the line for an urban electric railway. Itis the only purpose built terminus
hotel for the coastal electric railway and is therefore rare. It was also built to serve
the glen that was being established. Its position was prominent on the roadside and
of a distinctive landmark quality.
The building as shown on Cowley Groves website does not show the building is in a
poor condition in regards to the interior and beyond economic repair and there is no
5

44
45
information implied or suppiied that the butiding is structurally unsound.
The building has a presence due to its design and madding and its current condition
does not detract from its ambience other than the fact that the ground floor Is
closed,
Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society (4 June 2019). The Society
objects to the application. It argues that the details closely resembling those of
Baillie Scott are the most sound form of evidence, short of written contemporaneous
proof, that architectural historians use in attributing the architecture of a building.
The Society lists a number of Glens where the former buildings associated therewith
have now been lost. They set out that the Groudle Glen Hotel is a relatively intact
surviving example of 19" Century Victorian Glenside hotel development, is unique
visually and historically, being closely associated with the railway station. They state
that the electricity for the hotel came from the railway. From the Glen below the
building remains as it was historically. In winter itis possible to see the hotel in
association with the water wheel which was built to pump water up into the slate
tanks in the roof ofthe hotel.
While appreciate concerns over the condition of the building, and the drainage
responsibilities and the potential for alternative use, these do not carry any weight In
the registration or de-registration of the bullding. The application does not appear to.
consider in detail why the architecture and history is not so important as to warrant
deregistration.
Groudle Glen Rallway (30 May 19). Object to de-registration. The Groudle Glen
Railway charity is run by volunteers who have restored and maintain the Groudle
Glen Railway, The railway was built at around the same time as the hotel to
transport visitors to the terminus on the headland at the site of a Victorian zoo. The
hotel is an integral and vital part of the Glen’s history and should undoubtedly be
protected.
‘The ambiguity over whether the building is Baillie Scott should not trigger de-
registration as this was detailed when the building was considered for registration.
Evidence Is weighed towards it being Baillie Scott.
Building synonymous with Groudle Glen. It is instantly recognisable and features
heavily in photographs and paintings through the years. It is a key link in the tourist
route between Douglas and the Railways which sees thousands of visitors every
year. Argument in respect of viability should be treated with caution, the Hotel could
be utilized in a different capacity whilst preserving its key features. The argument
that interest in the hotel peaked In the 1970s in misinformed. Anecdotal evidence of
volunteers suggests recent visitors express disappointment that the hotel is not
playing a more active role in the Glen.
‘The drainage issues are irrelevant and the owner knew of these upon purchasing the
site.

4.6
47
48
“The exterior of the building is still recognisable against historic photography and is
not a reason to deregister the Hotel.
Its preservation has been contemplated for several years, the Onchan Local Plan
(2000) suggests an area embracing the Groudle Glen Hotel, the Tram Station and
adjacent buildings and the water wheel as a conservation area,
The applicant's comments regarding the waterwheel and Sea Lion Rocks are not
relevant. The water wheel is being restored in its original form and the current
buildings at Sea Lion Rocks are not original.
The charity argues that the Hotel is of special historic interest in that it is more likely
than not a Baillie Scott building (Baillie Scott was already in the employ of Richard
Maltby Broadbent) and it is a key part of the landscape in the Groudle Glen area and
an integral part of the Glen’s unique heritage. It contributes to the Glen in a way in
which the proposed residential dwellings would not. The condition of the building is
not relevant. The offer to record the building is wholly insufficient.
Isle of Man Steam Railway Supporters’ Association (3 June 2019). Object to the
application to deregister
the building. Consider a Conservation Area should be
created embracing the hotel, tram station and waterwheel. Strongly believes Hotels
should be protected. It is essential in keeping the appeal of both the Manx Electric
Railway and the Groudle Glen itself alive.
Friends of Onchan Heritage (4 June 2019). Strong objection to de-registration of this
landmark building in Onchan. It was built for Richard Maltby Broadbent who created
Groudle Glen. He resided in the newly completed Ivydene by Baillie Scott and was
‘one of the first five Onchan Village Commissioners to be elected when they were
formed. The hotel has played an integral part in the history and development ofthe
Groudle Glen and the Electric Railway, being its first terminal at the time of opening,
While there have been alterations the corpus of the Baillie Scott design is still present
and visible.
The property has been Registered for its historic interest but it should have been
registered also for its architect MHB Scott.
Manx Electric Railway Society (28 May 2019). The Manx Electric Railway Society is
registered as a charity. Its prime function is to promote interest in and for the
continued retention, operation and development of the Manx Electric and Snaefell
Mountain Railways. The Society has been accepted as an interested part with regard
to planning applications in the past, particularly Laxey Station. The Charity has
worldwide support. The railway is an exceptional survivor from 1983, in its original
style, along its original route.
There is little room for debate that the building was the work of Baillie Scott.
‘The fact that there is no interest in the building is likely to be its price. To enable
7

49
4.10
5.1
5.2
5.3
anyone to overprice a property and thereby justify de-listing it on the grounds it is a
white elephant is not in the public interest. If sold at the right price it could be
converted into self catering accommodation and be preserved. It would be very
attractive for tourists interested in railways and tramways and would take a
meaningful place in modern times.
The building is unique in that It is the only surviving hotel designed by the world
renowned Arts and Crafts architect Balllle Scott. It is therefore of special interest due
to its age and rarity.
The hotel forms a key part of the setting for the MER station. It is part of the
pedestrian route linking the tramway
to the Groudle Glen Railway. Its removal will
detract from the experience of visitors to the glen which would be tragic at the very
time great efforts are being made to improve and restore the glen.
Hotel is a vital piece of tourist infrastructure
Resident of Balladoyle House, Fort Island Road, Derbyhaven (17 May 2019).
Believes there should be more registered buildings that reflect the history and
context of the Isle of Man. Should not be beyond the imagination for a suitable use
to be made of the building by an appropriate purchaser who is willing to put in the
work and effort for an economic business plan and hopefully restore some of the
original features.
Resident of Glenholme, King Edward Road (324 May 2019)
The property should remain on the Register. It is debatable that there Is no
documentary evidence that the building can be attributed to Baillie Scott. He was
already working for Mr Broadbent when he decided to bulld the hotel. It would be
strange for Mr Broadbent to employ another architect for the hotel. The front and
side elevations and the roof remain more or less unchanged. The sale price does
little to reflect its condition, little or no maintenance has been carried out for last 8
years.
Legal Issues
‘The means to designate Registered Buildings is set out within Section 14 of The
Town and Country Planning Act 1999 (The Act).
In registering a building the Department shall consider its special architectural or
historic interest.
The Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013 sets the
procedure for consideration of an application to de-register a building. Such an
application must be made within 21 days of the Registration. No further application
may be made for a period of 5 years aftera decision on a previous request.

5.4
5.5
5.6
6.1
6.2
63
6.4
Ifa person wishes
to apply
to be treated as an interested person the person must
indicate in his or her written submission the relationship between the person’s land
and the building that is the subject of the application. When it determines the
application the Department must decide which persons (if any) who have made
written submissions with respect to the application should be treated as having
sufficient interest in the subject matter of the application to take part in any
subsequent proceedings relating to the application. The applicant, the agent if there
is one, the owner and occupier of the building, Manx National Heritage and the local
authority are interested parties by virtue of Section 9(4) of the Town and Country
Planning (Registered Bulldings) Regulations 2013.
Reasons must be given for the decision whether or not it is to retain the building on
the register or to de-register it.
The decision can be appealed by the applicant or the applicant's agent and any
interested person in writing to the Department within 21 days of the date of the
notice.
Policy
The application should be assessed against DEFA’s Operational Policy on the
Principles of Selection for the Registration of Buildings into the Protected Buildings
Register. This helps set out that the statutory criteria is that the building be of
architectural or historic interest.
Architectural Interest: To be of special architectural interest a building must be of
importance in its architectural design, decoration or craftsmanship; special interest
may also apply to nationally important examples of particular bullding types and
techniques (e.g. buildings displaying technofogical innovation or virtuosity) and
significant plan forms.
Historic Interest: To be of special historic interesta building must illustrate important
aspects of the nation’s social, economic, cultural, or military history and/or have
close historical associations with nationally important people. There should normally
be some quality of interest in the physical fabric of the building itself
to justify the
statutory protection afforded by Registration.
In applying the statutory criteria and considerations, as set out above, the
Department will also consider the following principles:
Age and rarity. The older a building is, and the fewer the surviving examples of its
kind, the more likely it is to have special interest. The dates are indications of likely
periods of interest and are not absolute. The relevance of age and rarity will vary
according to the particular type of bullding because for some types, dates other than
those outlined below are of significance. However, the general principles used are
that: (i)before 1800, all buildings that contain a significant proportion of their original
fabric are likely to be registered; (ii) from 1800 to 1860, many buildings may be
9

ra
71
7.2
worthy of consideration for Registration; (iil) after 1860, because of the greatly
increased number of buildings erected and the much larger numbers that have
survived, progressively selection Is necessary; (Iv) particularly careful selection is
required for buildings from the period after 1945; (v) bulldings of less than 30 years
old are normally registered only if they are of outstanding quality and under threat.
Aesthetic merits: The appearance of a building — both its intrinsic architectural merit
and any group value — is a key consideration in judging registration proposals, but
the special interest of a building will not always be reflected in obvious external
visual quality. Buildings that are important for reasons of technological innovation, or
as illustrating particular aspects of social or economic history, may have littie
external visual quality.
Selectivity: Where a building qualifies for registration primarily on the strength of its
special architectural interest, the fact that there are other buildings of similar quality
elsewhere is not likely to be a major consideration. However, a bullding may be
registered primarily because it represents a particular historical type in order to
ensure that examples ofsuch a type are preserved. Registration in these
circumstances is largely a comparative exercise and needs to be selective where a
substantial number of buildings of a similar type and quality survive. In such cases,
the Department's policy is to register only the most representative or most significant
examples of the type.
National Context: The Isle of Man is a separate entity to the UK and the unique
context of the Island's historic development must be taken into consideration as part
ofthe selection process. Special interest is likely to be conferred on buildings which
may not be the case if they were in the UK, given the Isiand’s unique context.
State
of Repair: The Department should register a building which has been assessed
as meeting the statutory criteria, irrespective of its state of repair or other factors
such as implications for future use or financial issues.
Assessment
‘The reasons for the application to de-register the bullding are set out In Section 3
above. Of the reasons put forward matters such as drainage, why other buildings
are not also Registered and the implications for future use are not relevant. The
argument that its use as a hotel and/or restaurant is understood, as is that tourism is
not sufficient to sustain an interest in the building. However, the registration of a
building does not mean it cannot be put to another sympathetic use or mix of uses.
The applicant's other reason for applying, that the building does not have any special
historic interest and that due to the level of deterioration, it does not contribute to its
current setting, is disputed by those objecting to the application who have set out
compelling reasons why the building is of architectural merit and has close links to
the social history of the Island.
10

8.1
91
10.
10.1
11.
11.1
12.
12.1
12.2
Conciusion
Following assessment of the application, taking into account the reasons put forward
and considering these against the statutory requirements and the Operational Policy
it is concluded that the information provided in the application is not sufficient to
warrant deregistration of the building.
Consideration of Interested Person Status
As stated above the Registered Building Regulations sets out that when it determines
the application the Department must decide which persons should be treated as
Interested Parties. DEFA’s Operational Policy on Interested Persons does not apply
to applications to de-register a building. Nevertheless it does state that ‘if a person
wishes to apply
to be treated as an interested person the person must indicate in his
or her submission the relationship between the person’s land and the building that is
the subject of the application’. This is presumably so that a decision can be made as
to the impact of the decision on that person’s land.
Victorian Society wish to be given IPS. The Manx Electric Railway Society state that
they have been accepted as an interested party in the past. Both cite their special
interest in the subject matter but do not give any information in respect of the
relationship of their land and the building.
No other party has expressed an interest in IPS or given details of the relationship of
their land and the building.
Accordingly it is recommended that no parties are to receive Interested Person
Status, other than those who automatically receive it under paragraph 9(4).
Resource Issues
None
Options
1. Having considered the content of this report to approve the application and
remove the building from the register.
2. Having considered the content of this report to refuse the application to remove
the building from the register.
3. To agree to not award Interested Person Status to persons other than those listed
In paragraph 9(4) of the Regulations
Recommendations
To refuse the application to remove the Groudle Glen Hotel from the Protected
Buildings Register for the following reason.
Following assessment of the application, taking into account the reasons put forward
and considering these against the statutory requirements and the Operational Policy
it is concluded that the information provided in the application Is not sufficient to
warrant deregistration of the building which is of architectural and historic interest.
To not award Interested Person Status to persons other than those listed in
paragraph 9(4) of the Town and Country Planning (Registered Building) Regulations
2013.
iL

AUTHORISATION
Supported by relevant Director: JEW EO Cae
=
Signature: murder Wee Date: 20/3],
Chief Executive:APPROVED / NOT APPROVED / REFERRED BACK
Signature: ZUM e_ Dates nha /19
Minister: APPROVED / NOT
APPROVED / REFERRED-BACK
pa (GEE Date: 14 | 4 | ms.
COMMENTS
(Continue overieat
if necessary)
12

 
 
 
 
Mrs Anna Kawalek 
Former Groudle Glen House 
King Edward Road 
Onchan 
Isle Of Man 
IM3 2JY 
 
Town and Country Planning Act 1999 
------------------------- 
Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
In pursuance of powers granted under the above Act and Regulations the Department of 
Environment, Food and Agriculture determined to REFUSE an application by Mrs Anna 
Kawalek, (Ref 19/00510/CON) to remove Former Groudle Glen House King Edward 
Road Onchan Isle Of Man IM3 2JY   from the Protected Buildings Register for the 
following reason(s): 
 
1. 
By the serving of this decision notice the abovementioned property is hereby 
retained on the Protected Buildings Register and as such, under Section 15 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act 1999, 
 
(1) No works may be executed 
(a) for the demolition of a Registered Building, or 
(b) for its alteration or extension in any way which would affect its character as a building 
of special architectural or historic interest 
 
without grant of formal Registered Building Consent 
 
 
NOTE Following assessment of the application, taking into account the reasons put forward 
and considering these against the statutory requirements and the Operational Policy it is 
concluded that the information provided in the application is not sufficient to warrant 
deregistration of the building which is of architectural and historic interest.  
Sections 14 to 16 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1999 impose special controls on the 
demolition, alteration and extension of registered buildings. As this property has been 
retained on the Register, those controls will continue to apply. 
 
The effect of this refusal is that the property remains on the Protected Buildings Register. 
 
 
Date of Issue: 
15th October 2019 
 
 

 
Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control, Murray House, Mount 
Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email planning@gov.im 
Director of Planning and 
Building Control 
 
Guidance Note 
 
The effect of this decision is that the building has been removed from the Protected Buildings 
Register. However, under Regulation 11 Appeal to the Minister; 
(1) 
An appeal from a decision of the Department may be made by the applicant or the 
applicant’s agent and any interested person in writing to the Department within 21 days of 
the date of the notice under regulation 10(1), signed by that person and must include –  
(a)   the reasons for making the appeal; 
(b)   Payment of a planning appeal fee as prescribed in an order made by the Department 
under section 1(1) of the Fees and Duties Act 1989; and 
(c) An election to have the appeal conducted by means of an inquiry or by means of 
written representation. 
 
(2) 
The Department must refer the documentation received under paragraph (1) as 
 soon as practicable to the Chief Secretary. 
 
Note: section 20 of the Interpretation Act 1976 enables the Chief Secretary’s powers under these 
Regulations to be delegated. 
 
(3) 
Within 10 working days if the receipt of the documentation, the Chief Secretary must      -  
(a)  if the appellant has elected to have the appeal conducted by means of written 
representation, invite the Department or any interested person within 21 days of the 
invitation to indicate whether the invitee would prefer an inquiry; and 
(b) in all cases invite the appellant, the Department and any interested person to send 
detailed written submissions to the Chief Secretary within 21 days of the date of 
invitation, which period may be extended on request at the Chief Secretary’s 
discretion, for consideration by the planning inspector. 
 
(4) 
With respect to appeals to be conducted by means of written representations only, the 
Chief Secretary may invite the submission of additional written submissions within 14 days 
from the date of such invitation. 
 
(5) 
If the appellant or any interested person requests the appeal to be conducted by means of 
an inquiry, the appeal must be conducted by such means unless all persons making such a 
request elect instead for the appeal to be conducted by means of a written representation. 
 
(6) 
The Chief Secretary must refer an appeal under paragraph (1) to a planning inspector. 
 
(7) 
The planning inspector –  
(a)  must consider the application and any written submissions made with respect  to it; 
(b) may in the case of an inquiry only, hold a pre-inquiry meeting to be convened at his or 
her behalf by the Chief Secretary; 
(c) must in the case of an inquiry only, give to the appellant, the Department and every 
interested person, an opportunity to appear before him or her on a date fixed and to 
make oral representations and to call and examine witnesses; 
(d)  may invite any Government Department (including any Division of the Department) or 
any other body or person to provide technical advice; and 
(e) must make to the Department a report in writing that includes the planning inspector’s 
recommendations as to the determination of the appeal. 
(8) 
The Department must consider the report of the planning inspector and –  
(a)  must either allow or dismiss the appeal; and 
(b)  may in either case reverse or vary any part of its decision, whether or not the appeal 
relates to that part. 
(9) 
As soon as practicable after the determination of the appeal, the Department must give 
notice  in writing of the decision to the appellant and every interested person, and the 
notice –  
(a)  must include details of where the report of the planning inspector can be viewed; and 
(b)  if, and to the extent that, the decision does not follow the recommendation of the 
planning inspector, must state the reasons for the decision of the Department. 

 
 
(10) 
The appellant may withdraw the appeal by giving notice in writing to the Chief Secretary at 
any time before –  
(a)  7 days from the date scheduled for the commencement of the inquiry; or 
(b)  in the case of the written representation procedure, at any time before the final date 
of receipt for written submissions. 
 
If no appeal is lodged within 21 days of the date of issue overleaf, and this decision becomes final, 
the Department’s public reference copy (counter copy) of the planning application may be 
collected by the applicant or their agent from Murray House. 
 
Please note that if the counter copy of the application is not collected within THIRTY DAYS 
following the last date on which a planning appeal can be made it will be destroyed without 
further notice. 
 

 
Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control, Murray House, Mount 
Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email planning@gov.im
```
