# RB 267

Scarlett House, Castletown,IM9 1TB

## Parish
Malew

## Registration date
18/09/2012

## Extracted details
* Architects: Patricia A Tutt
* Construction: 1717
* Reasons for registration:
  - special architectural and historic interest
  - architectural interest and/or aesthetic quality
  - historic interest
  - landmark qualities
  - group value
  - age and rarity


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1346490/rb267-scarlett-house.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No, 12/00267/REGBLD
> “a
infrastructure
planning and building control
bun-troggalys - plannal as gurneil troggal
DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 18th September 2012, the Department of
Infrastructure, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and Regulations REGISTERED
Scarlett House Scarlett Castletown Isle Of Man IM9 1TB
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
‘THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Authority.
Dated this 18th September 2012,
By Order of the Department
ley
Deputy Secretary to the Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the bullding stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) _ within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
To: Property Owner—FILECOPY
Local Authority - MALEW, Commissioners New Offices, Main Road, Ballasalla, IM9 2RQ
Director, Manx National Heritage
Isle Of Man Natural History & Antiquarian Society

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: Scarlett House
ADDRESS: Scarlett, Castletown
Post CODE: Img 418
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Malew Commissioners
GRID REF: SC258676
OWNER: Mrs Susan Temple
Report by: Patricia A Tutt, Dip Arch, RIBA, ARPS
Contents
History and ownership of Scarlett House
The name
The buildings and grounds
William Sedden
Evaluation
Appendices:
Additional maps
Castle Rushen and Atholl Papers — pertaining to William Sedden
Various references to Scarlett House
Deeds, wills and other legal documents relating to William Sedden and to Scarlett House
Page
| 3

To be let for one or more years, from the 12” November next that excellent House, at present in the occupation of Mr John
Proctor, and commonly called SCARLETT HOUSE, dstont about half a mile from Castletown. The above premises
are
‘conveniently suited for the purpases of Sea Bathing, ond unite the Advantages of a delightful Prospect and healthy
‘Situation. The House consist of four good Parlours on the fist flor - an excellent Drawing Room, and five Bed Rooms. The
‘Stabling, Coach-house, Cow-houses ond Brew-house ae extensive ond commodious. Any person disposed to Form, and
toking up 0 Setting of the Premises, may be accommodated with from 10 to 40 Acres of Land, in excelent condition; or any
Person desirous to take @ lease of the Land ond Out Offices, independent of the Mansion House, wll be treated
with. For
{further particulars opply to John Lucas, Knack Rushen; Wm Quayle, Advocate, Castletown;
or Jas Quirk, Knockaloe.
NB.
‘There ls Abundant
of Lime Stone on the Premises ond convenient
Lime Kins.
‘The Manks Advertiser, and Jefferson's Weekly Intelligencer, 18117
Page | 4

Scarlett House
Right: the current OS map
showing Scarlett in relation to
Castletown and Castletown Bay. Page | 5
Location
Scarlett House is prominently located to the south-west of Castletown, off Scarlett Road, The road
continues across the front of the house, along the stony foreshore past an abandoned quarry,
towards old lime kilns, the Scarlett Visitor Centre and a former coastguard lookout point, forming,
part of the coastal footpath Raad-ny-Follan. Scarlett Point forms the western extremity of
Castletown Bay - a geologically complex and treacherous accumulation of limestone and volcanic
rock, including columnar basalt, some of which will have been removed for stone and shingle for
nineteenth century harbour works at Douglas and Castletown.
The house faces north-east towards Castletown, providing a visual stop to the vista along Scarlett
Road from where the road exits The Parade. It is now sheltered by the avenue of trees lining the
forecourt formed by the entrance drive, but stands tall above them with the ‘piano nobile’ being
raised on a half-basement.
The land-holding
is in the treen
of Scarlott (sic). The name of the treen and of the house clearly
derives from the rocky feature on the coast, which is highly likely
to be Scandinavian in origin, The
earliest speliing on record for this name is Scarclowte, in the Manorial Roll of 1521 (clowte is an old
English name fora ‘cloth’ but this word is much more likely to have Norse origins). Later spellings
are 1595 — Scarthlet, 1643, 1703 Man. Roll. Scarlott. Manx form Scarleod (skarljo:d]. S. Skarfakiuft,
which Kneen (1925) interprets as ‘cormorant's cleft.’). Broderick (2002) places a similar
interpretation on the name.
‘The Treen of Scarlott (1703 Manorial Roll) comprised:
Knockrushen, 38 acres. Vausetown, 60 acres. Scarlett, 2 q.(ie 2 quarterlands) Close near
Great Mill, 3 acres. Barry's Close. Moore’s Close. The Red Gopp. Ballalough, 1%q. Pickard’s
Closes. The Cloddaugh. The Bagnes Gardens.

In the mid-nineteenth century, two (usually) invaluable mapping exercises were carried out - the
collection of tithe maps, and Wood's Atlas (1867). Unfortunately, neither are helpful in tracing the
‘ownership of land at Scarlett. The tithe maps do not cover the area south-west of Castletown (the
MNH librarian advises that one of the Rushen record books is missing) and Wood's Atlas is
ambiguous, with the closes (fields) within the treen being in differing ownerships (see composite
map below). page |6
‘Wood's Atlas
— a combination of the maps for Arbory and Malew (with some distortion, as they donot quite
match up). The parish boundary is shown by the green line. The map shows the treens of Scarlett, Knock
Rushen and Balladoole (the latter straddling the parish boundary).

History and ownership of Scarlett House
In 1654 the Countess of Derby granted the estates of ‘Balladoole, Scarlet and the Calf island’ to
Richard Stevenson, ” to hould to him, his heirs and assigns according to ancient custom and holding
by tenant right in this Isle called ' the tenure of the straw’ for ever.* Stevenson had been a staunch
supporter of the Derby cause and this was his reward.
The years between 1654 and c1717 when William Sedden arrived at Scarlett are elusive to track
down and need further research into elusive wills and deeds. Kitto (1990) dates the house at c1800
and says it is built from limestone taken from the nearby quarry. Both these ‘facts’ can be
contested. The date of the house is obscure, confused by the presence of the farmhouse alongside.
There is a date-stone for 1717 on the front of the house, which may or may not be contemporary
with its construction; references
to Scarlett as an estate or place
of residence date back
to the mid-
seventeenth century and references to two different occupants at the same date suggest either
multiple occupation of the farm, or to the fact that both farm and house were in separate
occupation. Scarlett House is shown on the 1860s series OS map, but the quarry at Scarlett is not—
surely indicating that the quarry post-dates the house. It seems to have been worked mainly in the
late nineteenth century. The facings for the Primitive Methodist Chapel, 8-10 Malew Street,
Castletown, built in 1890, were carved at the quarry by John Cornish, the foreman? and Scarlett
limestone was used for the War memorial at Marown, designed by RW Creer of Douglas.
Robert Callcott, HK (? - 1670) was at Scarlett in 1661 and 1667, as recorded in the various published
directories, but in 1666 ‘the wife of John Norris of Scarlet’* was charged with witchcraft. In 1671
Robert Callcott’s son Ferdinando Callcott sold Scarlett to Henry Corrin and by 1717, Scarlett had
become the property of William Sedden. His colourful history is described on page
9. After William.
Sedden’s death, the estates of Scarlett and Knockrushen, with their farms, stayed in the family until
1982, passing through his daughter Anne and her husband the Vicar-General Evan Christian to their
descendants.
Between 1789 and c1793, a Roman Catholic priest found asylum on the Isle of Man. Father Louis
tutored the Governor's and Bishop's children whilst living at Castle Rushen and sometimes offered
Mass in a barn at Scarlett. On the death of the Vicar-General in 1809, his son Robert offered the
estate for sale and then as there were no buyers, the forty acre estate was offered to let over the
period from 1811 to 1819. During this time, the Vicar-General’s daughter Anne Elizabeth Christian,
who had married John Lucas, was occupying part of the estate at Knockrushen House and various
tenants occupied Scarlett House and Farm. Tenants* included Captain William Spedding, a Mr
Proctor (who offered board and lodging in Scarlett House in 1814), Philip Quirk, tenant of the farm
(whose family was evicted), Captain Thompson (whose furniture was offered for sale in 1823),
William Christie and a Major Harper (whose daughter
was married from the house). A Major
Thomas Hamilton, entered two sons into King William’s College in 1833 from Scarlett, and was still
there in 1837. Both sons died young in Castletown, presumably of injuries incurred in the sub-
continent (one was a Lieutenant in the Ceylon Rifles, the othera Lieutenant in the 23° Bengal
Native Infantry). In 1840 three fields (11 acres) on Scarlett farm were offered for sale and the
* Moore (1900)
2 william Cooper's Castletown, and Eva Wilson’s notes thereto:
‘htto://www.isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook/towns/castitwn/whc/ch10.htm
"Episcopal registry document 151
“ Its possible that some of these were lodging elsewhere at Scarlett, and not in Scarlett House: some
references just say ‘Scarlett’ rather than ‘Scarlett House’.
Page |7

estate with house, out offices and limekilns® was again offered for sale in 1845 and farm equipment
was offered for sale in 1847.
Robert Lucas, the son of John Lucas and Anne Christian, had two children, Anne Elizabeth and
Susannah Catherine. C1878, the Trustees of Anne Lucas mortgaged Knockrushen to (buy? and) pay
for repairs to Scarlett House.® Anne Elizabeth Lucas married Robert Edwin Narramore, JP of Basford,
Staffs, 1894, The Narramores occupied Scarlett House and are credited with refurbishing the Page | 8
house and for being responsible for the Victorian alterations. Robert Narramore died in 1903.
Susannah Lucas married John Osborn Christian in 1918 and had a son, John Osborn Lucas Christian,
From 1927 to 1961 the estate of Scarlett and Knockrushen was held by a series of family trustees
{including Spittalls and Crowes) who passed on the trusteeship through their heirs. In 1964, when a
£1791-0-0d debt, with interest, of Elizabeth Anne Narramore from 1893 was finally cleared by her
grandson John Osborn Lucas Christian, the trustees finally passed the estate to him. He was Captain
of the Parish of German between 1946 and his death in 1973. He lived at Ballagyr, German, another
property long held by the family estate.
In 1979, his three daughters were assigned probate of his will, but one declined. The other two,
Mary Elizabeth Erica Seymour Curphey, who was then living
at Ballagyr and Dorothy Frances
Catherine Christian agreed to split the estate, with Mrs Curphey retaining Scarlett House; Ballagyr,
German; and 9 Mount Pleasant, Douglas with an adjacent plot of land. Miss Christian retained
Knock Rushen Farm and Scarlett Farm. John Osborn Lucas Christian's will required that their
mother, Dorothy Aphra Marguerite Christian (nee Wolfe), would have the benefit of use,
occupation and rents of the estate until her death, should she succeed him. This agreement was
restated in November 1982” and a couple of weeks later in December 1982, Elizabeth Erica
‘Seymour Curphey sold Scarlett House to Harry and Patricia Walker for £50,000."
‘The Deed Plan (overleaf) shows the extent of the site as itis today, limited to the walls enclosing
gates, driveway, forecourt, house, side and rear yards, outbuildings, and walled garden; and
extending across the old retting pond (for soaking flax) and the roadway towards the foreshore.
In 1986, Harry and Patricia Walker sold Scarlett House to the present owner and her husband,
Reginald Robert Temple and Susan Elizabeth Jardine Temple for £175,000. Mrs Temple remains in
the house as the sole owner (2011).
From the foregoing, it can be seen that for over two hundred and fifty years, until 1982, Scarlett
House was part of a substantial family estate that also included Scarlett Farm and Knockrushen
House and Farm. Ownership and occupation or rents passed through the family: Sedden, Christian,
Lucas, Narramore, Christian. For much of that time it was occupied by tenants, but for part of that
time it was unoccupied.
* William Sedden acquired the limekitns c 1720 (Malew OD2/86
~ undated)
* Could this date be wrong, and this mortgagerefer to that from 1893, repaid in 1964? Their address in
Porter's Directory of 1889 is ‘Scarlett Road’.
7 Malew, Feb 1983/297
* Malew, Mar 1983/345

PLAN REFERRED TOD
Vee ineNEHT HN pelts One
> MateReires: fot Joncnen wine
‘Mans ROAD.
~
15 un,
teem Mae es
WIDSON, MARSH & COMPANY, | deta! Leo a b:artes! Hoore scam, Coulietown
__seweg ruber
Page
| 9

Page
| 12
‘An extract from the 1860s series OS maps SYC90016001 and SYC30019001 showing Scarlett House and Farm
(circled red) Note that the quarry has not been excavated, and the spelling is ‘Scarlet’ with one ‘t. Trees are
indicated around the boundary of the walled garden/orchard, the lime kilns are shown and the pier is indicated
(now broken up and barely recognisable as such).

William Sedden (c 1677- 1757)
William Sedden may have been descended from one of the Lancashire Seddons (variously spelt
Sedden, Seddon, Seden, Sedan and Seyden) who were an old farming family with connections to the
Earl of Derby. He first appeared on the Isle of Man in 1700, when he was warranted Deputy Clerk of
the Rolls in the Castle Rushen Appointments Book. This was reconfirmed as a commission in 1702
and he was then in the employment of James Earl of Derby, Lord of Mann and the Isles, until 1722,
when his name disappears from the Appointments Book records. During that period he became
Deputy Water Bailiff (1703), Attorney General (1705 - 1719) and Water Bailiff (1707-1722). He was
not a member of the House of Keys. On four occasions he was also appointed joint Deputy Governor
whilst the Governor was off the island (1713 under Governor Charles Z. Stanley, and, 1718, 1719,
1721 under Governor Alexander Horne). These were joint appointments with two Deputies being
appointed, the other being John Rowe, Comptroller.
Page | 13
He was clearly an influential and powerful man, with a number of friends, one of whom was Captain
‘Alexander Horne, who became Governor in 1718 and who remained in post until 1723. Sedden’s
first wife was Christian O'Reilley, of Ballarasney, Co. Meath.’ Their daughters (and co-helresses)
‘were Christian and Susanna. Christian Sedden married John Kelly of Peel in St, German's Cathedral
‘on April 17, 1743. The only child of this marriage was a daughter Anne, who married Vicar-General
Christian. The Christian's inherited Scarlett House and from whom a line descends. William Sedden’s
second marriage, at Arbory in 1735, was to the widow Dutcibella Sabbartan, nee Parr, the daughter
of Deemster John Parr (1651-1713), of Parville, Ballabeg, Arbory and his second wife, Jane.
Dulcibella had a daughter Jane, nee Sabbartan, wife of the Revd William Walter of Portsmouth
Dulcibella had received ‘houses and garden in Castletown oftwo shillings and a penny rent weh !
had by my wife’ in her father’s will, and passed these to her daughter Jane in her own will.” William
had a son, William Junior, who died intestate in September 1743."
Almost from his arrival, William Sedden was actively acquiring property and conducting various
transactions as recorded in the deeds, trustee agreements, and sales and mortgages records, many
in association with others (see Appendix). Some of these are informative, but others are very vague
and itis not clear whether some relate to property, money-lending or actions in support of family
and friends, perhaps through his role as Attorney-General. In some cases, he was exchanging parts
of fields and gardens to rationalise boundary discrepancies ~ in one case in 1712, adjustments were
made to the land used by the library and new chapel in Castletown, with Sedden paying £4 for the
land he gained, which the Bishop put towards the costs of the new chapel.
In 1710 William Sedden and Richard Fox had acquired a field at Scarlett. It is believed that he
acquired Scarlett House and farm c1717, largely on the basis of the dated keystone above the
central first floor window, but the various deeds are inconclusive as to the actual date and as to.
whether the house was already built by then. He stayed there until his death in 1757.
In 1722, the year of his final loss of office, William Sedden was embroiled in some undignified
events where the Governor and his Officers were in serious conflict with the Ecclesiastical Court of
Bishop Wilson. The conflict began with a case in 1717 where a Mary Hendricks was charged with
* Goodwin (1901-2) - the primary source for this has not been identified.
*° will of Deemster John Parr, Rushen, EW 1713/3 (MNH EW29) - there is an addendum to this will resolving a
dispute with Henry Norris over a wedding dowry, with William Sedden being one of the witnesses (Parr signed
the will in 1709, but the addendum does not tally being dated in the MNB transcription as 1706); will of
Dulcibella Sedden, Malew, 1756/2 (MINH GL730/932) ~ she was buried in Kirk Arbory 29 Sept 1754.
TM Malew wills 1744/2E (MNH GL707/343). Statement that William Sedden Jr died intestate; statement by his
father that all debts paid and that the estate reverted to him (the father).

adultery and came toa head when the Ecclesiastical Court charged Mrs Jane Horne, the Governor's
wife, with slandering Sir James Poole and Mrs Puller (over a sexual intrigue which she couldn't
prove) and demanded apologies, pending which she was to be denied communion. The Governor's
chaplain continued giving Mrs Horne communion and was suspended by the Bishop. In a counter-
measure, Bishop Wilson and the Vicars General were charged with acting contrary to the lattothe
diminution of the Lord’s prerogative, and to the subversion of the Government. In this,
Sedden was one of Horne’s four co-conspirators” in concocting (effectively forging) documents of
the court without the knowledge of the twenty-four Keys. The Bishop ignored this insult and was
fined in his absence. In default of payment, Wilson and his vicars-general were imprisoned in Castle
Rushen for nine weeks, during which he received an offensive reply to his letter of appeal to Lord
Derby. Despite this, the Bishop successfully appealed to the Crown against these illegal charges,
with His Majesty addinga rebuke to all parties including Derby. These rebukes were delivered in
person to Horne and each of his colleagues, apart from Sedden who was in England at the time.
Horne demanded to see the original rather than a copy - which was brought to him by witnesses.
He then threw a tantrum, slandered the messenger foully, and threw the papers down the stairs.
The other three did likewise. in 1723 the Bishop laid a charge to the Privy Council against Horne and
his four officers, demanding that they account for their contempt and reimburse costs. After much
prevarication and obfuscation in London and on the part of Lord Derby, the King’s advisors
eventually found in the Bishop's favour, but the promised award of costs never materialised. A
warrant was issued for the arrest of Horne, but was not acted upon. He resigned but stayed on the
island (eventually being buried close to the Bishop at Kirk Michael) and was replaced as Governor in
1723 by Major John Lloyd. At some point after this, John Rowe, leading co-conspirator was
incarcerated in a ‘sponging-house’ in London, on a false charge which Sedden was instrumental in
‘encouraging against his former colleague.
Page | 14
Sometime later, most probably in 1730, the Bishop charged Sedden with fornication (a fairly
‘common charge) and reported that he was “provokingly disobedient”. May 20: "A letter to Mr.
Sedden, sen., when confined in St. Germans for fornication.” A marginal note adds: “NB. Mr. Sedden
Imposed upon me, he was not in prison." Sept. 12. “Maliew. Sumner certifies that he charged Mr.
Sedden to do penance : he refused. Directions to Mr. Woods to require him a second time, and to cite
him to appear the next Church Court." The ‘St German's’ referred to Is the ecclesiastical prison in the
dungeon of the old cathedral at Peel. This story is reported in Keble’s Life of Bishop Wilson (1863)
and Moore (1900).
‘There is some confusion as to the date of William’s death. There is a letter dated 9" June, 1757
from Governor Basil Cochrane to the Duke of Atholl, in which he says that “Mr Sedden of Scarlet at
last has left us dyed as he lived with a very bad character” but this appears to have been premature.
Feltham refers to the death of William Sedden, gent, as being on 4 June 1758 aged 81 as does the
wills reference in the proceedings of the Consistory Court.”* Feltham gives his memorial on a chest
tomb in the churchyard at Malew as:
" Know’st thou, O man! who possest by this spot,
That rest from labour is the just man's lot
His body buried here lies mix’d with earth,
His soul, set free, enjoys a second birth,
And disencumber'd from its clay flies light,
Springs through the air beyond the realms ofnight.
Wrapt up in pleasing hope, it mounts on high
To meet its Lord— Let sinners fear to die
2 The others were John Howe, Daniel Mylrea and Charles Moore.
® Malew Wills, William Sedden, 1758/3E (MNH GL711/527)

‘This tomb could not be found in August 2011, but there are tombs on which the lettering is.
unreadable, including one to the left of the door which has a headstone for his relatives John,
Robert and Anne Lucas. Extraordinarily, foraman who had been Attorney-General and witness to
many legal disputes, William Sedden, like his son, died intestate, and there are no addendums to
the bald statement on the wills file.*
In 1759, a year after herfather's death, Susanna Sedden wrote to the Duke of Atholl with a Page | 15
complaint against Governor Cochrane which was eventually heard in a court convened in January
1762. The details are not reported in the correspondence and records, but it seems that she was
being deprived of what she saw as her inheritance and blamed the Governor. Cochrane appointed
‘the judges to hear
this claim — and perhaps his opinion of her father influenced them. Her claim was
dismissed.
Signature
William Sedden’s name appears as one ofthe signatories in various letter books in the Castle
Rushen Papers, but his actual signature appears only once, where he signs underneath Alexander
Horne on a document from 1724. The signature is awkward but legible, and leans to the right. A
second more robust copy
of his signature can be found on an affidavit from 1745 in respect of his
deceased son’s estate (ref TM).
Wiliam Sedden’s signature from a court document of 1745
(photograph from microfilm projection)
* Ibid.

Evaluation: Scarlett House
Scarlett House is recommended for addition to the Protected Buildings Register
as itis considered
significant for its location, its quality and for its occupant William Sedden as defined in Policy RB/1.~
Registration of Buildings as set out in Planning Policy Statement 1/01 - Policy and Guidance Notes for page | 16
the Conservation of the Historic Environment of the Isle of Man:
¢ ARCHITECTURAL INTEREST AND/OR AESTHETIC QUALITY: The register is intended to
include buildings which are of importance to the Island for the interest of their
architectural designs, decoration, craftsmanship, or by virtue of the eminence of the
architect; this would include important examples of particular building types and
techniques (e.g. buildings displaying technological innovation or virtuosity, as might be
found
in structures connected with the historic railways of the Island) and significant plan
forms;
The house is an excellent, clearly defined, exemplar of a raised five-bay, double-roofed house in the
Manx manner and with the exception of the conservatory, un-encumbered by extensions. The
elegant proportions of the exterior and the quality of the interior details (even if some are c1900)
are worthy of record.
Features of note include the roof structure, half-basement, swept entrance steps and simple portico,
plasterwork (probably Victorian), and Poylt Vaish fireplace, given a marbled effect by local artist
David Byrne and the wide hall and staircase.
© HISTORIC INTEREST: This includes buildings which illustrate important aspects of the
{stands social, economic, cultural, religious, agricultural, industrial or military history; this
importance might also be assessed in the particular local context of the town orvillage in
which the building is located;
‘The social history is significant, in relation to that cluster of closely-related Manx families that
dominated Manx affairs in the seventeenth
to nineteenth centuries and who formed the social hub
based around Castletown, and so is the political history with the house occupied by a man who was
variously Water Bailiff, Attorney General and occasional Acting Governor, and who was also a key
player in the notorious contretemps between state and church that led to the imprisonment of
Bishop Wilson.
+ LANDMARK QUALITIES: Some buildings will be clearly recognisable as having such qualities
whether they be located in isolated coastal or rural locations,
or as focal points within a
busy local townscape;
Scarlett House is placed in a dominant location in the local scene, elevated on its site and with 2
greater contextual ‘presence’ that the other two large and significant houses in its vicinity —
Balladoole and Knockrushen. it gives Scarlett a focal point within the panorama of Castletown Bay
and provided a ‘stop’ to the straight line of Scarlett Road before it swings left to skirt between the
quarry and the limekilns.
© GROUP VALUE: Especially where buildings comprise an important architectural or historic
unity or a fine example of planning (e.g. Squares, Terraces or Farm Groups).

The house, outbuildings and grounds form a clearly-defined related group, mostly of similar date,
within fine limestone walls and with appropriate landscaping.
© Age and rarity: the older a building is and the fewer surviving examples of its kind, the
more likely
it is to be worthy of Registration. Many ofthe Island’s oldest buildings are
likely
to be the best constructed survivals of the past, where the majority of more humble
dwellings, built of less durable materials and construction, will have disappeared with the
ravages oftime. Thus, those buildings, or parts of those buildings, which survive in
substantially their original condition and whose origins can be established as being prior to
1800, would be worthy of consideration for Registration. Buildings built between 1800 and
11860, may be worthy, although some selection will be necessary. For the period 1860 to
1920, because of the greater numbers which survive, assessment and selection is
necessary to identify the best examples. For the same reasons, only selected buildings for
the period after 1920 would be Registered: buildings which are less than thirty years old
would normally only be listed, if they are of outstanding quality.
Scarlett House has been difficult
to date. The date-stone may or may not be accurate, but there is no
particular reason to discredit it. The extent of the refurbishment believed to have been carried out
bby the Narramores c1900 may have extended beyond the decorative internal features and
rendering. It certainly seems to have obliterated many earlier features which would be more
diagnostic. The availability of good timber and slate but the retention of the relatively early device of
the double roof with central valley gutter and the nature of the jointing
of rafters all suggest
an early
Georgian date which could fit with the 1717 of the date-stone The robust simplicity of the staircase
also suggests an early date but this appears to be misleading as the stair outlet is not shown on the
1860s
OS map and must be one of the Lucas or Narramore alterations. It is possible, however, that
the staircase was not newly constructed but was salvaged from elsewhere, as this was a common
practice (cf Ballacooil, Dalby, where stair newels and gates from the Villa Marina were used). It
would require further investigation to determine the original position of the stairs.
Page | 17

References
MINH: Atholl Papers, Castle Rushen Papers, various wills, deeds, newspaper records and other documents ~ all
listed in separate Appendices.
Deeds Registry: various deeds registered in Malew ~ see separate Appendix.
Page | 18
Policy and Guidance Notes for the Conservation of the Historic Environment of the Isle of Man’ Planning Policy
‘Statement 1/01, Department of Local Government and the Environment.
Broderick, George Placenames of the Isle of Man (2002) Volume 6: Sheading of Rushen (Kirk Malew with
Castletown and Ballasalla, Kirk Arbory and Kirk Christ Rushen with the Calf of Man
Gill (1929)A Manx Scrapbook, Ch
4: Patrick
Goodwin, George (1901-2 ) MANX ANNALS OF NINETY YEARS AGO. Peel: Peel City Guardian
Kitto, John (1990) Historic Homes of the Isle of Man. Braddan: Executive Publications.
Moore, AW (1889) MS Manx families
Moore, AW (1900)A History of the isle of Man. London’ T Fisher Unwin.
‘Moore, AW (1901) Manx Worthies or Biogrophies of Notable Manx Men and Women. Douglas: S. K. Broadbent
‘& Company, Limited.
Kneen, JJ (1925) The Place-Names of the Isle of Man with their Origin and History. Douglas: Yn Cheshaght
Ghailckagh
www.
isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook/
www
thepeerage.com

Scarlett House photographs (all taken 13.5.2011 unless otherwise indicated)
Page | 19
“ ®

‘Theentrance porch
to the half-basement on the north
side of the house. The grassed lane to the side leads to
the rear yard.
‘The building at the end is the former stables/barn, now
used for storage
Page
| 20
‘The rear of the house.
Below: outbuilding attached to the rear of the house.
Below right: interior of the outbuilding with chicken
roosts set into wall. (but ~ could this be Robert Calcote’s
“hawkehouse’ referred to in the rent rolls from 1670?)

Page
| 21
‘Above: the site of the former
greenhouse.
Above right: the rear
of the house,
seen from the walled garden. Note
the small window-to-wall
proportions.
Right: The large walled garden
contained an orchard until the
1980s.
Right: Scarlett Farm was not
separated from the house until
1979, Advertisements for the sale
of ‘half the estate’ first appeared in
1809, and notices offering the
house and/or farm for sale or let
continued to appear in the Manx
press until 1947.

‘The Drawing Room. The French
doors with coloured lights lead into
the conservatory.
Right: The Drawing Room archway.
Below. the Dining Room fireplace ~
local PoyliVaish black limestone,
scumbled by local artist David
Byrne
Below right: the Dining Room
archway.
Page
| 22

Above. plasterwork in the hall.
Right: the triple band of decorative plasterwork
in the Drawing Room cornice.
‘Above, left and below: The drive through the gateway and the
shelter belt of wide-spreading trees makes an attractive approach.

Page | 24
Above: flax and blue fag in the
former retting pond
came ca
‘The keystone to the central first floor window
above the door contains a family crest dated
1717, with the motto ‘Fide et omore’ (faith and
love). Above the shield with three roses is a
closed helmet (signifying a family that does not
belong to the aristocracy) topped by two hands
holding another rose. It must be the Sedden
crest, but may have been erected some time
after William Sedden’s acquisition of Scarlett
i717.
Scarlett
House and farm. The step pitch of the
double pile roof is clearly saeen in this view.
12.6.2008

‘Scarlett House in context ~
‘winter. Scarlett farm with
ruined roof isto the left. The
sewer pipe isin the
foreground.
Photo: Jason McNee
Date - prob. May2011
‘The roof with dasped and
notched rafters.
Photo: Jason McNee
Date
— prob. May2011
Photo: Jason McNee
Date
— prob. May2011

Page
| 26

VE!
ert 0,
17 APR 2012
os, %,
PERE Page | 27
Isle of Man
Natural History & Antiquarian Society
etzef Mar Oaity
Noa
aw Secretary: MC) Bryan. alincrye Sem Cottgr alloayh ek 1 Man IMTS
Yel 1824 9705. all ryanbonssn
ne
‘Secretary
tothe Planning Commites,
Planning and building Control Dilan,
Department
of infrastructure,
Murray house,
our Hvac,
Dougias,
linn 288 37" aprb 2012
ear Mader,
NOTICE OF PROPOSAL TO REGISTER A BUILDING.
“The We of Man Natura History nd Antiquarian Society washes to record thelr appreciation ofthe Department of
Infrastructures corwutation on the Registration of ullings. The Society generaly welcomes invovement inthe
research Into and convertion of Mist fusldngs and Strucure and hopes may be move Involved in such
‘onsotation
inthe fare.
In otfering comments on the reystratons the Societys assuring the Department has already undertaken fay
<etaled stucles into the architecture and history of these buléngs
In relation tothe current proposed Regstrations the Society would otferthe following
‘Seacett House Ws particulary pleasing to note theIncluston af is bung being an 28% century dveting alba
“ctoranied”interally. The Socety nats that Rs setting to the shores included. The Sarety woud have Med
foxee the incision ofthe od form bulkrgs to the south (Lower Scarlet on the plan} ats believes that these
were developed on an empty ste Inthe seca decade ofthe 18th canury and wenkd therefore posy be eer
‘than
tha house. Moreover should any development take place in relation to these it could adversely mpact onthe
ew of Scarlett House abtalned from the pub footpath and car parkto the south. However
Ris eware thatthe
‘Quatertane ves ey fragmented, ass refiected nthe BaBad on the death of tam Drone
rest wet Scare” down atthe shore,
Its cheat portions are a wd descation ;
‘The poor as, dow heir has not m scrap to eat;
‘rc thy dest, io Done, is thet breaks our heart
‘We believe these buldings were probably retained by the heirs to John Osborne Lucas Christian aftr selling the bg
‘noe the 72197047 and now bale to W.LE. Can of Elershe ane rs mother

‘Appendix A
1 salsokrown tht there was a conection between Scret pn Knacaloe Hooo the hess ofthe former
‘mamyngJomes Qui 1760-1810 her of Knockaoe, and posbly responsible for developing the odes structures
ofthat farm
Te tht tis wes the home: Page | 28
‘tmnt Moc Rad. Jabs Te Sacey rege home of Moore oF Moore's
Ms age
ern Hous aslo Te Sit parry veneer of es beg as etng. The
Sot efouty tae tel repre abn once paceng oan nd wa ete ese
‘omens
a carer hepa Pes
‘Beal Police Station formerly Peel Court House), Derby Raad, Peal The Society recognises that this
buliing with is cells underneath is unique bulding and worthy of Registration per se.
‘Old Police Station Crown Street Peel The Society welcomes the recogntion being gen tothe architect
‘Thomas Brine withthe Inclusion ofthis building and its boundary wall,
‘The Harbour Office, East Quay, Peel Together withthe above the Society Welcomes the fact thot together
the Registration
of these two bulldings and their boundary walls wil help reinforce retention ofthe street
pattern which is historically deliberately designed so as to mitigate the Impact of wind, sand and sea into
Castle Street and whose breach would be very undesirable in townscape terms.
‘In summary the Socety supports the Registration ofa the above. tl artery welcome tomate the Importance
‘being ven tothe buldngs
settings and not ust the buldegs themsehes.
nd repairs
dgres
swore

Manx National Heritage ‘Soyracemapa
vee Boob Se oon a
Eiraght Ashoonagh Vannin F tec
& Steet
\wwwstoryofmann.com © mesrceretspesim
COPY
Page
| 29
‘Our Ref: RBQ/ACC
17 Apri, 2012
M53 Callow
Secretary to the Planing Committee
Department of Infrastructure 18 APR 202
Mount Havelock site
25meee
er Ow
Douglas
IMS 25F
Dear
Ms Callow
B12/00266 Peel Police Station, Derby Road, Peel, iMS 1HH
RB12/00267 Scarlett House, Scartett, Castletown, IM9 178.
'RB12/00268 Giyn Moar, Glen Mooar Road, St John’s, IM4 3AQ
RB12/00269 Lome House, Douglas Street, Castletown, IMS 1AZ
‘RB12/00270 Harbour Office, East Quay, Peel, TMS 1AR
'812/00273 The Old Police Station, Crown Street, Peel, IMS 1A7
Manx National Hertage welcomes the proposal by the Department of Infrastructure to enter the
above buildings in the Protected Bulldngs Register.
‘nt wil aise as appropriate with the Building Conservation Officer to provide relevant historical
Information relating to these buildings as may be contained within our archives.
Curator
~ Field Archaeology
Inspector
of Ancient Monuments
cc Mr'S. Moore, Bulking Conservation Oficer (by email)
dara ing aid Rab th Mana an ok Wh ec
At Yo
siihqqaees
Ourey be tohoesettce “
‘Appendix B


Department of Infrastructure | frastructu
Isleof Man Planning and Building Control Division cet
“BM 7.16m-
Pe“ng
1:1500
006 008 ar 012
Base Map reproduced
trom the isle of Man 12/00267/NOTICE
SEMap Soros Coney mapping, | Comments '2/00267/1
of LocalGovernment and the Environment, isle of Man
son
promoted neccmrernen a Date 21 September
2012
Ce ‘Produced using Uniform 7.3 at DLGE, Murray House, Mount Hevelock,
Dougies, IM 2SF
```
