# RB 247

Ballaradcliffe House

## Parish
Andreas

## Registration date
(not provided)

## De-registration date
(not provided)

## Extracted details
* Construction: mid-nineteenth century (possibly 1852)
* Reasons for registration:
  - Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
  - Historic Interest
  - Close Historic Association
  - Landmark Qualities


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1386638/rb-247-notice-of-de-registration-combined_compressed.pdf

## OCR
```
Registered Building No. 247
Isle of Man
Government
Retltys Elian Vaxwin
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, FOOD AND
AGRICULTURE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (REGISTERED BUILDINGS)
REGULATIONS 2013
IN ACCORDANCE with Part 3 14(1) of the Act, The Department of Environment, Food and
Agriculture on the 3TM December 2024 determined that,
Ballaradcliffe House
Kiondroghad Road
Andreas
IM7 3EL
should be removed from the PROTECTED BUILDINGS REGISTER.
As required under Schedule 2 2(1) of the Act the Department HEREBY GIVES NOTICE that
the property has been removed from The Protected Buildings Register.
Dated this 4% December 2024,
By Order of the Department
Redacted
For and on behalf of the Director, Planning and Building Control
Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control Directorate. Murray House,
Mount Havelock, Douglas. Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email buildingconservation@gov.im

Department of Environment, Food and Agriculture, Planning and Building Control Directorate, Murray House, Mount 
Havelock, Douglas, Isle of Man, IM1 2SF. Tel 685950 email buildingconservation@gov.im 
NOTE 
: 
 
 
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999; 
 
Schedule 2 
The Protected Buildings Register 
 
Notifications of entries on register etc. 
 
2 (1) As soon as may be (practical) after a building has been entered in the register, or the 
register has been amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a 
notice on the owner and the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or 
removed from the register. 
 
   (2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which 
has been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from 
the register- 
(a) 
within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1); 
(b) 
after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a 
previous request under subsection in relation to the building. 
 
Under the Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013 
 
5. 
Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2) 
(1) 
The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period 
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21 
days. 
 
(2) 
The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period 
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years. 
 
Notices sent to: 
 
Property/Site Owner and Occupier 
Manx National Heritage 
 
 
 
 

Form RB2
Registered Building No. 07/00247/REGBLD
isle of Man
Government
Relltiys Elian Vanin
DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENT
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 20" March 2007, the Department of
Local Government and the Environment, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Ballaradcliffe House Kiondroghad Road Andreas isle Of Man IM7 3EL
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed: by or under any- statutory provision or with the-prior. written consent of the Planning
Committee.
Dated this 23 March 2007
By Order of the Department
Redacted
EJ Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1° Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE i
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1)As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupler of the building stating that it has been entered In or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an Interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the .
ragister-
(a) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under’ sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(£) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
Co
1, Loca! Authority
2. The Owner/Occupier of the Building
3. Director of Manx Museum and National Trust, Kingswood Grove, Douglas;

FIckns! Department of Local G vernment and the
A : . Data 23 March 2007
ay Environment Directorate of Planning and Building Control
Comments 07/00247/REGBLD
Croftonville
Ballaradeliffe House
Balaradcitfe
Beg
© Crown Copyright Department of Local Government and the Environment, Isle of Man. 1:1000
\ \
S Base Map reproduced from Isle of Man Survey mapping Licence Number GD000/97 € che
Unauthorised reproduction infringes Crown Copyright and may lead to prosecution or civil proceedings. >” produced using Uniform 7 3 Km 0.02 O04 0.06

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: Ballaradcliffe House
ADDRESS: Kiondroghad Road, Kirk Andreas
POST CODE: IM7 3EL
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Andreas Parish Commissioners
GRID REF: 407 995
Introduction
Ballaradcliffe House (plates 1 & 2} was the quarterland farm house of the Radcliffe
family who have occupied a property on this site since the sixteenth century. The
current house was built during the mid-nineteenth century and was included in the
Ordnance Survey map of 1869 (Appendix 3).
Ballaradcliffe quarterland was located in the treen of Ballahestine, within the Parish of
Andreas, in the sheading of Ayre. Other quarterlands in Ballahestine treen were Balla
Steen, Larebane (now Larivane) and Ballavoddan. The quarterland of Ballaradcliffe
included a large part of the present day village of Andreas. Due to the central
position of the estate within the parish of Andreas and the close proximity of the
village_and church, it was only a matter of time before some. of the land was _
developed.
Andreas parish is located centrally in the northern plain, the fand use is predominantly
agricultural and due to the richness of its tithes, until recent times the parish was the
seat of the Archdeacon of Mann.
History
‘Ballaradcliffe’ quarterland dates back to the sixteenth century when the land first
came into the ownership of the Radcliffe family and the estate has remained in the
same family for over four hundred years.
The Radcliffe family originated from Lancashire and came to the Island following the
success of the Stanley family, who became Lord’s of Mann in the fifteenth century. It
is believed that the Radcliffe’s first came to ‘Ballaradcliffe’ in the sixteenth century
after a member of the family married the heiress to this part of Ballahestine treen in
Andreas.
According to Constance Radcliffe there is a possibility that the first Radcliffe at
Ballaradcliffe was Henry Radcliffe, previously a monk from the Friary of Bemaken in
the parish of Arbory, whose father was the Abbott Thomas Radcliffe at the time of the
Dissolution in 1540. It is stated that following the Dissolution of the monastery,
Henry Radcliffe married a Miss Kelly (or Machellie) who was the heiress of the Balley
Hastyn estate which was one of the Andreas treens, and as a result of this union
‘Ballaradcliffe’ was created. "Whether the Andreas Radcliffes are all descended from a
i

monk of Rushen Abbey or not, the Liber Assedations confirms that the original owners
of Ballaradcliffe were the Machellies, and that the Radcliffes first entered there in the
middie of the sixteenth century.” (Radcliffe, IOMNH&AS, vol TI, no.2, pp.172/3). The
dates of this correspond with accounts of the Radcliffe’s moving to Andreas and there
would have been few Radcliffe’s on the Island at that time so it is possible that there
was a connection.
Charles Bland Radcliffe (b.1822, d.1889)
Although he was born in Brigg, Lincoinshire, Charles Bland Radcliffe was the son of
Manx parents. His father Charles Radcliffe was a Wesleyan minister who had
originated from Ballaradcliffe, he happened to be stationed at Brigg when Charles
Bland, his eldest son, was born.
Charies Bland Radcliffe is known for being one of the earliest investigators of the
electrical physiology of muscle and nerve. Two of his brothers became Wesleyan
ministers like their father and a third brother was an antiquarian.
William John Radcliffe (b, 1844, d.1916)
William John or ‘Willy’ Radcliffe was the Member of the House of Keys for Ayre from
1903 to 1916. He was also a member of the School Board, the Parish Commissioners
and had been a Wesleyan focal preacher for 30 years. He never married and lived at
Ballaradcliffe until his death in 1916.
On the 24" June 1906 the Lieutenant Governor Lord Raglan visited Willy's Radcliffe's
home at Ballaradcliffe and a photagraph was taken in order to mark the occasion
(Appendix 2). Also pictures are the Andreas Benevolent Society, which was founded
in 1812 in order to help the parish poor and it is the only Benevolent Society in Britain
which still remains today.
Architecture
Ballaradcliffe is a mid-nineteenth century farm house. There are both Georgian and
Victorian influences in the property, although the exterior is a typical Georgian style
house. The property has been little changed since its construction and it includes the
main living areas on the ground and first floors, in addition to attic space and a half-
basement (see Appendix 7 for the current floor plans).
The front aspect of Ballaradcliffe is exceptionally striking (plate 1), sitting on the brow
of a hill, well-positioned in the landscape and with southerly views across the northern
plain towards the hills (plate 3). The front elevation also has a much more
fashionable style than the rear, but despite this the only entrance to the house is from
Kiondroghad Road at the rear where the views to the property are more modest
(plate 4), and on closer viewing the rear elevation has even remained unrendered
(plate 5). The Ordnance Survey map of 1869 indicates that even at that time, the
property was accessed from the Kiondroghad Road and the grand views of the front
of the house were only seen from the road across the fields at the front of the
property and not as the property was approached.
The exterior style of the property is typical of Georgian houses in that the front facade
is elegant and formal with a square symmetrical shape and there is a panelled door in
the centre with a fan light over (plate 6). The design of the fanlight was originally
straight fines radiating out from a central arch at the bottom above the door, but it
2

has since been replaced with an inappropriate style of horizontal and vertical lines,
not too dissimilar than the appearance of rows of bricks. The original fan light is
clearly visible in the archive photograph dating from 1906.
Further features of the house which are commonplace with Georgian properties
include the tiled hipped roof, the paired chimney stacks and the sash windows which
consist of six panes over six panes (plates 7, 8, 9, 10 & 11). The archive photograph
from 1906 clearly shows that the earlier windows were six over six pane sashes,
however since that time the front half have been replaced with the later Victorian-
style two pane over two pane sashes (plate 12), whilst the back half have remained in
the Georgian-style.
The 1906 photograph reveals an interesting feature of the house in that the three
present day blocked windows on the right-hand side elevation (when viewed from the
front) initially look like they were once sashes like the rest of the windows. However,
on closer inspection it becomes evident that the three ‘windows’ were flat in
appearance and the top sash didn’t project out over the bottom sash; this is because
these windows were actually painted onto the wall in the recesses,
This process of painting ‘dummy
windows’ onto elevations ~— was
commonplace in the United Kingdom
during the entire Georgian period, as
‘Window Tax’ was enforced from 1696
to 1851 and property owners would
dodge payment by blocking windows,
camouflaging them or painting dummy
windows on- in--order- to confuse-
the
inspectors, However, dummy windows
are much more unusual in the Isle of
a Man because Window Tax was never
introduced and these fake windows are
a likely to have been painted onto the
a : eet elevation for aesthetic reasons, in
E : Se order to make the building appear
é more symmetrical. Evidence of
i es painting the fake windows can still be
ae : seen in the paintwork today (plate 13).
The fake windows on the right hand
side elevation are the top centre, the
bottom centre and the bottom right.
S cori ee No windows on the front or rear
as : ae 5 elevations were blocked but there are
: cage also blocked windows on the left hand
: ‘ a side elevation which were possibly also
: painted dummy windows at one point,
however these cannot be seen in the
fy
Detail of archive photograph from 1906 archive photograph from 1906 and the
showing the three ‘dummy’ sashes, area is overgrown today so it could not
(Manx National Heritage) be inspected at the time of this report.

Three of the four elevations have been rendered whilst the rear elevation remains
painted only (plate 14). A close inspection of the rear elevation revels that the hause
is constructed of a mixture of slates, local round stones (found widespread on
northern beaches) and red bricks. Also at the rear of the house is a small porch
entrance constructed of brick, this porch is unusual because it has a large single slate
to the roof (plate 15).
Red bricks have been used in much of the construction of Ballaradcliffe, such as in the
window surrounds, the internal walls, chimney breasts, the outbuildings and some of
the garden walls. They could have been made on site or they could have originated
from the Ballacorey brickworks, which was located in Andreas and in production from
1851 to 1926.
Internally, the property has retained many original features. On the ground floor, the
front entrance has timber panelled walls to the lower half (plate 16) and the vestibule
double doors and sidelights appear to be original (plate 17). The main internal doors
on the ground and first floors are four panelled painted timber which are a Victorian
style (plate 18), whilst older style six panelied painted timber Georgian doors are used
in the kitchen, basement (plate 19) and attic (plate 20). This illustrates that at the
time the property was constructed the modem styles of the time were used in the
main living areas of the house, whilst the parts hidden from guests featured older
Styles.
The staircase is modest in style and has a simple wooden Victorian-style newel at the
base in the main hall (plates 21, 22, 23 & 24). The two front rooms have both had
their original fireplaces removed and replaced with modern styles. The windows in the
reception room on the right hand side have painted timber panels surrounding them
(plate 25), whilst the other reception room adjacent to the kitchen has none,
illustrating that the room on the right hand side would have been more formal, away
from the day to day running of the house and perhaps where guests would have been
taken. A traditional fireplace still remains in a room to the rear of the property (plates
26 & 27); there is also a built-in cupboard in the recess beside the chimney breast
(plate 28). These built in cupboards are often found in Georgian and Victorian houses
as the proximity of the fire was made us of in order to keep dampness at bay (The
Elements of Style, 1996). There are further cupboards on the first floor of
Ballaradcliffe House (plates 29, 30 & 31). There is a small utility room adjacent to the
rear porch which features an unusual small three over six pane sliding sash window
Plates 32 & 33). A Georgian six panelled door in the kitchen leads to a stone staircase
which gives access to the basement (plate 34).
Three of the first floor bedrooms retain their original fireplaces (plates 35, 36 & 37),
the rear left hand side bedroom has subsequently been converted into a smaller
bedroom and bathroom, therefore this fireplace has been lost. There are built in
cupboards between the chimney breasts and the inner walls, hand carved hooks inside
the cupboards match others attached to a beam in one of the attic rooms (plates 38 &
39). The bedrooms to the front of the house (plates 35 & 36) have a larger fireplace
than the one to thee rear (plate 37), this illustrates the importance of the rooms at the
front, which would have been used for the owners of the property, whilst those at the
back were more likely to have been the children’s raoms. The interior of the cupboard
in the front right hand bedroom shows the front wall and internal walls un-plastered
(plates 40 & 41). It is clearly visible here that the main walls are constructed in stone,
(

being slate and round beach stones and the internal walls are brick built, which has
allowed them to be narrower.
The staircase leads up a further flight to the attic apace, which is partitioned off with a
timber wall and door (plate 42). The attic has been divided into two main rooms for
storage or living space, lit by small rooflights (plate 39). The door to one of these
rooms is Georgian style, painted timber with six panels (plate 20); the other door has
been removed in the past. The remainder of the attic is uncovered roof space where
the beams and the underside of the tiles are visible (plate 43). The door to this room
is unpainted timber with two separate panels, not decorative in any way (plates 44 &
45). This door has a wooden lock (plate 46), which is unusual and the door appears
to be the oldest in the house, perhaps even originating from an earlier building which
stood on the site. The uncovered beams reveal some pencilled graffiti, featuring
names and dates, The earliest date found was 1852 (plate 47), which could possibly
be the date of construction as it would correspond with the Georgian and Victorian
styles in the house, the use of bricks in the construction (Ballacorey brickworks started
production in 1851) and the house being included on the 1869 Ordnance Survey Map.
The property sits on sloping ground, the rear door being at ground level, whilst the
front door is accessed up a series of steps, As a result of the gradient, the basement
only covers the front right hand side of the property. In the main room in the
basement there is a Georgian style six-panelled door in unpainted timber (plate 19);
any door which was meant to be seen by visitors would have been painted as bare
wood was thought toe be very unsavoury during the Georgian and Victorian periods.
The main room in the basement also features a large fireplace (plate 48) and a
separate area, divided by a timber partition, presumably to be used for storage (plate
49). There are also two windows in this room which are both three panes over two
sliding sash, one with a vertical and the other with a horizontal lower glazing bar
(plate 50). There is a further window in an internal wall to allow light into another
roam, this window is a larger six pane over six sliding sash, perhaps one of the
originals from the front of the house which was removed in the twentieth century.
The garden
The grounds of Ballaradcliffe have some large mature trees and although parts of the
grounds have become overgrown, there are some well-maintained hedgerows and
lawns, particularly to the rear of the house. It is obviously a garden which has been
well looked after in the past.
‘There is a pair of large brick built gate posts at the rear left hand side of the house
(plate 51), positioned in order to separate the house and garden from the outbuildings
and farm workings. Although these gate posts are overgrown with Ivy, a closer
inspection reveals that they were originally two vertical stone slates (plate 52), once a
commion feature in the Manx countryside in areas where they were available but are
now seldom seen.
The outbuildings
Baliaradcliffe was historically a large quarterland farm and as with other such
farmsteads, there were originally a series of outbuildings and a farmyard on the site.
According to the Ordnance Survey map of 1869 (Appendix 3) there were what appears
to be three buildings on land adjacent to Ballaradcliffe House, but these have

subsequently been demolished. The Ordnance Survey map of 1869 includes a single
storey outbuliding immediately to the rear of the house (plate 53) which is still
standing, although the roof is now in poor condition. A further outbuilding is located
along a farm track to the rear of the house (plate 62), along with the thie veg (plate
58), although these buildings were not included in the 1869 Ordnance Survey map. A
current map of the area showing the positions of the former outbuildings is included
with this report (Appendix 6).
The larger barns of Ballaradcliffe were demolished at the end of the twentieth century.
Planning Application (99/786) proposed the demolition of the barns and the
construction of new properties on the site. The ‘Statement of Case’ in the Planning
Application contained the following statements with regard to the outbuildings
(Appendix 9),
The site is currently overgrown with trees surrounding the boundaries
bordering the main Bridge End Road and Ballaradcliffe Road residential
development. There are also trees along the side boundary brick wall
within the site and general scrub within the plot. Also standing on the site
is a derelict two storey stone and brick built building which runs east-west
across the site and was possibly constructed for some form of agricultural
use with storage at first floor level. There is also the brick built shell of a
single storey building adjacent ta the boundary hedging of the site and
numbers 9 and 10 Ballaradcliffe Road. There is substantial screening to
Bridge End Road but the lower end of the Appeal site is overgrown with
bushes, hedging and some paim trees.
There is already a large two storey building on the site which we wish to
demolish and remove together with the remains of other outbuildings, the
footprint of these buildings covers quite a large area but there is still a great
deal of open space feft around these buildings. Once removed, it will be
easier to site two dwellings comfortably within the confines of the site.
Still remaining on the site is the house of Ballaradcliffe, an adjacent single
storey outbuilding, a garage adjoining this outbuilding, the outside toilets or
thie vegs and a further outbuilding located nearby on a farm track,
, Outbuilding adjoining the house
The outbuilding immediately to the rear of the house (plate 53) is single storey with
features such as a wooden framed window (plate 54) and a fireplace (plate 55) with
chimney stack still in place. The part of the outbuitding which is nearest to the house
appears to have at one time been used as a water storage area. There is a brick-built
garage attached to the outbuilding (in front and to the right of the house in plate 56).
The garage has an interesting radial fan light over the doorway (plate 57), similar to
the original fan light over the front door of the main house, as seen on the archive
photograph from 1906.
Thie veg
Near to the garage is the brick built thie veg (plate 58) which has two rooms with
wooden toilet seats, one is a single seated room and is more modest in style and now
overgrown (plate 59), whilst the other is a double seated room with painted wooden

panelling and a window offering views to the surrounding countryside (plate 60). A
possible theory behind this is that the smaller, more modest thie veg was for the
employees of Ballaradcliffe such as the farm workers and housemaids, whiist the more
‘luxurious’ thie veg would have been reserved for the Radcliffe family and their guests.
Outbuilding on the farm track
A further outbuilding is located at the rear of Ballaradcliffe House, along a farm track
(plates 61 & 62). This single storey brick buiit outbuilding consists of a laundry room,
@ pig pen and a pigeon roasting room.
The laundry room has a floor made of round beach stones and it still contains the old
built-in laundry tub or ‘copper’ (plate 63), which has a built-in fire underneath,
necessary for boiling the water in order to kill parasites such as lice, fleas or bedbugs
which might be lurking in the washing. To the left of the laundry tub is a large open
hearth which may have been used for cocking or for simply heating the outbuilding for
the farm labourers or house servants to use (plate 64).
The pig pen adjoining the laundry room has an open front with troughs for feeding the
animals (plate 65). The room for roosting pigeons is at the end of the outbuilding.
Inside there are rows of brick perching boxes which have been built into the rear wall
(plate 66) and high in the gable elevation there is a small opening designed to enable
the birds to fly in and out (plate 67).
RECOMMENDATION
Ballaradcliffe House Is suggested for inclusion on the Protected Buildings Register for
the following reasons;
Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Quality
Ballaradcliffe is a Georgian-style farm house dating from the mid-nineteenth century
(possibly 1852). Architecturally Ballaradcliffe has not been altered much since it was
first constructed, with only minor alterations taking place and it is therefore a good
example of a Georgian property.
There are also outbuildings which should also be considered for inclusion within the
Registration as they are part of the site and they contain important historic features
which relate to the domestic and farming aspects of the property.
Historic Interest
‘Ballaradcliffe’ quarterland dates back to the sixteenth century when the land first
came into the ownership of the Radcliffe family and the estate has remained in the
same family for over four hundred years. The original quarterland now includes much
of the present day village of Andreas.
Close Historic Association
There are possible historical links with Thomas Radcliffe, the last Abbot of the
Franciscan Friary in Arbory who married into the House of Stanley. Links with Charles

Bland Radcliffe (1822-1889) who was one of the earliest investigators of the electrical
physiology of muscle and nerve and with William John ‘Willy’ Radcliffe (1844-1916)
who was MHK for Ayre fram 1903 to 1916.
Landmark Qualities
The landmark qualities of Ballaradcliffe are one of the property’s most important
features. Ballaradcliffe sits on the brow of a hill with views southwards across the
northern plain towards the hills. The property is a prominent feature in the landscape
and it is surrounded with trees with a long field in front of the property which positions
the house well back from the road (plates 1 & 2). The excellent site is possibly the
main reason for the location of Ballaradcliffe.

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
Books
Calloway S. (ed), 1996, The Elements of Style.
Kitto J., 1990, Historic Homes of the Isle of Man.
Watt D. and Swaliow P., 1996, Surveying Historic Buildings.
Newspapers
Cunliffe Shaw R., Story of an Old Manx Northside Family. Ramsey Courier,
Wednesday December 24" 1952. (Source ~ Manx Note Book website).
Manks Advertiser, 22TM May 1832. Ploughman.
Manks Advertiser, 1° January 1833. Fire at stable.
Manks Advertiser, 15" January 1833. Death of William Radcliffe.
Manks Advertiser, 5" February 1833. Sale of Farmstock.
Articles
Cumming J.G., 1857, Story of Rushen Castle, Chapter 3. (Source ~ Manx Note Book
website).
Manx Heritage Foundation, 1991, Manx Farming and Country Life 1700-1900.
Radcliffe C., The Radcliffe’s of Andreas, IOMNH8&AS, vol III, no. 2, pp. 172-195.
Maps and Plans
Wood's Atlas, 1867, DoLGE.
Ordnance Survey Map, 1869, DoLGE.
Current digital maps, DoLGE.
Photographs
Archive photograph (1906), Manx National Heritage.
Current photographs.

in tf
Manx Note Book website
www. isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook
Georgian Houses
www.woodlands-junior. kent.sch.uk/Homework/houses/georgian.htm
Georgian ‘dummy windows’
www.bbc.co.uk/northyorkshire/iloveny/architecture/windo Hery25.shtml
www.thisism: .CO.Uk/tax-advice/cauncil-
icle.html?in_article_id=4014398) e_id=82
Details of the washroom
www,schoolsliaison.org.uk/astonhall/changinatimes/themes/homes/poor/vans.htm
10
```
