# RB 269

Lorne House

## Parish
Castletown

## Registration date
11/11/15

## Extracted details
* Architects: Thomas Brine
* Construction: 1700's – 1828
* Reasons for registration:
  - Architectural Interest and/or Aesthetic Quality
  - Historic Interest
  - Close Historical Association


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1349630/rb269-lorne-house-scan.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No. 12/00269/REGBLD
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONEMT, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING (REGISTERED BUILDINGS) REGULATIONS 2013
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 11th November 2015, the Department of
Environment, Food and Agriculture, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and
Regulations REGISTERED
Lorne House Douglas Street Castletown Isle Of Man IM9 1AZ
‘as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of its special architectural and historic interest.
‘THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Authority.
Dated this 17th November 2015,
By Order of the Department
CA Dudley
Deputy Secretary to the Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF,

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the building stating that it has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (1);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building.
Under the Town and Country Planning (Registered Buildings) Regulations 2013
5. _ Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
To: Property Owner
Local Authority - CASTLETOWN, Civic Centre, Farrants Way, Castletown, IM9 1NR
Director, Manx National Heritage
Isle Of Man Natural History & Antiquarian Society

KA DEFRA.
Isleof Man Planning & BC
‘ore
Department [D.E.FA.
Division/Office_|Planning and BC
[Case Reference |15/00269/REGBLD
Date 17/11/2015
fa
‘Reproduced fom the loM Survey map win permission of te Oopartment of itastucture © Crown Copyright 2015.
Unauthorised reprocucton itinges Crown Copyright and may lad to prosecution er ch proceedings.

REGISTERED BUILDING  
 
 
NAME: 
Lorne House 
 
ADDRESS: 
Douglas Street, Castletown 
 
POST CODE: 
IM9 1AZ 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY: 
Castletown Commissioners 
 
GRID REF: 
266 676 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Lorne House is a beautiful Georgian mansion house set in extensive gardens and 
grounds in the centre of Castletown.  The spelling of the property was previously 
‘Lorn’ House (such as on the 1869 O.S. map), with ‘Lorne’ being a modern alteration. 
 
The house is believed to have been originally constructed in the 1700’s and it was 
either rebuilt or extended in 1828 to the Georgian design of the architect Thomas 
Brine (1766-1840). 
 
The house is noted for the survival of many original Georgian features, for being 
sited on ancient Abbey land and for having been the official residence of the 
Lieutenant Governor of the Island between 1834 and 1860. 
 
Lorne House, Castletown has been added to the Protected Buildings Register by 
reason of : 
 
its Architectural Interest and/or Aesthetic Quality;  
 
its Historic Interest; and  
 
for its Close Historical Association ; 
as defined in Policy RB/1 – Registration of Buildings as set out in Planning Policy 
Statement 1/01 - Policy and Guidance Notes for the Conservation of the Historic 
Environment of the Isle of Man: 
 
ARCHITECTURAL INTEREST AND/OR AESTHETIC QUALITY 
 
Summary 
 
Lorne House is a two-storey stone building with a hipped slate roof, typical of the 
early nineteenth century.  The extensive grounds which surround the property 
include gardens and woods and they are enclosed within a high perimeter wall. The 
property is unusual because it is a large detached house, set in extensive gardens 
and grounds in the busy centre of Castletown. 
 
Architecturally the property has retained its Georgian style and has many original 
features.  The architect who was responsible for the design was Thomas Brine 
(1766-1840) who had a significant influence on the architecture of Castletown during 
the early nineteenth century. Architecturally, the property has retained its Georgian 

style and has many original features, in particular, its semi circular bay which is a 
relatively rare architectural detail on the Island and one that is synonymous with 
Brine’s work. 
 
Key features 
 
The house is constructed out of local limestone, as are many other properties in the 
area.  The plan of the property is basically square and the south and east facades 
are the most attractive and have retained many Georgian features. 
 
On the front façade (east) there is a central entrance porch of enclosed wooden 
panels, around which there are arranged rectangular windows in the adjacent stone 
walls.  The southern façade is the most distinctive elevation of the property and it 
has a symmetrical classical form.  It has a wrought iron covered veranda across the 
full width of the elevation.  In addition to this, there is a curved projection in the 
centre of this elevation, which extends the full height of the building. 
 
All of the windows are characterised by a cement rendered frame to their openings, 
which is plain at the sides and head, but curved below the sill. 
 
Thomas Brine (1766-1840) 
 
The property displays features which are typical of a Thomas Brine design, such as 
the columns at the Gothic entrance porch on the eastern elevation. 
 
Thomas Brine came to the Island around 1810 and he went on to have a notable 
influence on architecture in the Island.  Brine initially worked as Clerk of Works to 
the Barracks Office in Castletown and whilst working there, he built up his 
architecture portfolio by doing private work ‘on the side’.  When his army employers 
required him to move location in late 1815, he decided to stay on the Island and 
resigned his post.  At one time he held the lease for Poolvaish quarry, famous for its 
black marble, and also for lime burning at Scarlett (A Manx Note Book website). 
 
In Pigot’s Directory for 1837, the only architect listed in Castletown was Thomas 
Brine in Arbory Street.  Thomas Brine was responsible for some of the finest designs 
in Castletown and in addition to Lorne House, these include the House of Keys, the 
original George Arms (later the Barracks), the Roman Catholic Church, St. Mary’s, 
Church and the Herring Tower at Langness.  He was also responsible for 
modifications to Castle Rushen which were necessary for its use as a prison. 
 
HISTORIC INTEREST and CLOSE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION 
 
Summary 
 
The location on which Lorne House is built played an important role in the ancient 
history of the Island.  King Olaf I (1113-1153) is thought to have lived on the site 
and the remains of his Viking longhouse were discovered by builders in 1786.  In 
addition to this, the site also contained an ancient keeil and burial ground. The 1878 
OS map extract denotes the site of a chapel and burial ground in the field within the 
grounds to the north of Lorne House. 
 

Lorne House played an important part in the social and political history of the Island 
during the nineteenth century, being the official residence of the Lieutenant 
Governor between 1834 and 1860. 
 
Early use of the Site 
 
It is thought that King Olaf I (1113-1153) once lived where Lorne House is now 
located (Hulme P.J., 1990).  A meeting was held there in 1134, which was presided 
over by King Olaf I.  At this meeting the decision was made to build a monastery on 
the site of St. Lua, and so the Abbey of St. Mary was founded at Rushen Abbey. 
 
Lorne House Hill is within the grounds and this is thought to have been an early 
Tynwald Hill.  Lorne House Hill was previously known as ‘Howyngren’ which means 
‘Hill of the Sun’.  In addition to this, it is strongly believed that there was an ancient 
keeil (Keeil Woirrey) located in the grounds of Lorne House.  The Ordnance Survey 
map of 1869 notes the site of a ‘Chapel & Burial Ground’, although there are no 
longer any visible remains of this building, with the stones believed to have been 
reused in the mid-nineteenth century for the construction of the nearby stables.  It 
has also been reported that there have been discoveries of lintel graves within the 
grounds and that in 1954, drainage excavations in the roadway adjacent to the 
house, also revealed a lintel grave there (Kitto J., 1990). 
 
Eighteenth century 
 
In the early eighteenth century this area was owned by the Taubman family of the 
nearby Bowling Green House (and later of the Nunnery, near Douglas).  In 1727, the 
land was sold by John Taubman to Captain William Fitzgerald of the Castle Rushen 
garrison (Hulme P.J., 1990).  The sum paid was 18s (Weekly Times, 07/09/1972).  It 
can be assumed that Captain Fitzgerald’s intention was to build a property for 
himself outside the castle grounds.  On the Castletown Commissioner’s website, 
‘Castletown Heritage’ believe Lorne House was initially built at this time in 1727.  In 
an article in the Weekly Times from September 1972, it was stated that, “He 
[Captain Fitzerald] built a house there and thirty years later it was occupied by his 
widow and her daughter who was also a widow.” (Weekly Times, 07/09/1972, p.5).  
A list of householders in Castletown c.1757 reveals that at that time, Mrs Margaret 
Fitzgerald was a widow and she lived with her daughter and they had one female 
servant.  It was also in 1757 that Mrs Fitzgerald resold the property back to the 
Taubman family and it stayed in the same family for many future generations. 
 
In 1786, builders on the site were reported to have come across the remains of a 
much earlier structure, believed to be a Viking longhouse (Hulme P.J., 1990).  This 
early building is thought to have been the home of King Olaf I (1113-1153). 
 
Early nineteenth century 
 
Lorne House passed down through the Taubman family and in the early nineteenth 
century, Colonel Cunninghame and his wife Christian Cunninghame (nee Taubman) 
came to live there. 
 
During the 1820’s, the Cunninghame’s had the original property either rebuilt or 
altered and the completion of these works was marked by a grand ball held at the 

property on 19th February 1828.  The ball was reported in an article in the Manks 
Advertiser which read; 
 
“Lorn House, the magnificent building lately erected by Mr. Cunninghame, was 
thrown open last evening, where a large party assembled at an early hour, amongst 
whom were a number of the principal inhabitants of Douglas.  Great taste was 
displayed in the decoration of his elegantly colonnaded hall; the grand staircase was 
peculiarly striking, from the singular and beautiful affects produced by the neatly 
entwined wreaths of evergreens which entwined the light fluted columns of this 
princely mansion.” (Manks Advertiser, 21/02/1828).   
 
The architect who designed these alterations was almost certainly Thomas Brine 
(1766-1840) who was responsible for many other designs in Castletown at this time 
and the work at Lorne House bears a strong resemblance to his other designs. 
 
The Cunninghame family died within a few years of each other and as a result of 
these deaths, Lorne House was empty in 1834. 
 
The Lieutenant Governor 
 
The Lordship of Mann has belonged to the Crown since 1765 when the British 
Government reclaimed it from the Duke of Atholl in order to put an end to smuggling 
which was causing them financial losses.  Historically, the custom was to have a 
Governor and a Lieutenant Governor who served underneath him.  However in 1830, 
the Lieutenant Governor ceased to have a superior after the Lieutenant Governor 
Colonel Cornelius Smelt, who had served under Governor Atholl, was given the title.  
 
During the early nineteenth century, the official residence of Lieutenant Governor 
was a late sixteenth century structure in Castle Rushen.  However, in the early 
1830’s the rooms used by the Lieutenant Governor were needed to accommodate an 
extension to the Courthouse.  The Lieutenant Governor at the time was Colonel John 
Ready and he had to find an alternative residence, although the British Government 
was prepared to provide an allowance of £150 per year for the Governor’s 
accommodation. 
 
Use as Government House 
 
Fortunately for the Lieutenant Governor, at the same time he had to find a new 
residence Lorne House had become vacant, following the deaths of the 
Cunninghame family.  The property was near to Castle Rushen and was surrounded 
by extensive grounds, so it was an attractive residence.  In 1834 Colonel John Ready 
took out a lease on Lorne House for 13 years (Hulme P.J., 1990 & Winterbottom D., 
1999). 
 
During this period (in 1836), Lorne House was mentioned in a guide to the Island, 
which was titled ‘A Six Day’s Tour though the Isle of Man, by a Stranger’.  The guide 
read, “Round the outskirts of the town are many neat villas and mansions, the 
principal of which is Lawn House, the residence of the Governor…”. 
 
Colonel Ready died at Lorne House in July 1845 and his successor was the Hon. 
Charles Hope who took up residence in Lorne House towards the end of the year.  

The lease on the property still had two years to run and in 1847 Governor Hope 
renewed it for a further thirteen years. 
 
After a period of fifteen years as the Island’s Lieutenant Governor, Charles Hope 
resigned his position and left the Island in 1860.  “One of the factors that might have 
affected his decision was that the lease on Lorne House ran out in 1860 and the 
owners would not renew it.” (Winterbottom D., 1999, p.43).  The owner of Lorne 
House refused to renew the Governor’s lease because at this time they had decided 
that they would like to live in the house themselves. 
 
Following the loss of Lorne House as the official residence of the Lieutenant 
Governor, there was pressure for the new Governor to move to the town of Douglas, 
which had been rapidly growing in population and importance.  In 1861, the new 
Lieutenant Governor was Francis Stainsby-Conant-Pigott who initially took rooms at 
the Castle Mona Hotel on Douglas promenade before finding a suitable property 
nearby, namely the Villa Marina (Hulme P.J., 1990).  The original house which was 
called the ‘Villa Marina’ is now demolished, but it dated from the early part of the 
nineteenth century and had a similar style to Lorne House with a central bay, a 
covered veranda and a hipped roof. 
 
Return to the Cunninghame Family 
 
In Thwaite’s Directory of 1863, the resident of Lorne House was Patrick 
Cunninghame.  However, Directories of 1881 and 1889 show that by that time, the 
Cunninghame family no longer lived there and the occupant was General Edward 
John Dickson. 
 
Twentieth Century to the Present Day 
 
Lorne House remained in private hands until the period between 1931 and 1972 
when it was used by the Christian Endeavour Holiday Homes Limited (Dearden S. 
and Hassell K., 1997 & Hulme P.J. 1990).  As a holiday home, the property was 
reported to be able to accommodate up to 80 residents and was used mainly for 
groups of children and the elderly (Weekly Times, 07/09/1972).  During the Second 
World War, Lorne House became the Manx Children’s Home because the 
Glencrutchery Home in Douglas was being used as a hospital by the Royal Navy 
(Hulme P.J., 1990).  Seventy babies who were made homeless during the Blitz came 
to stay at Lorne House (Weekly Times, 07/09/1972). 
 
In an article in the Weekly Times dating from September 1972, it was announced 
that the Christian Endeavour Holiday Homes Limited were leaving Lorne House.  The 
article also noted some of the architecture of the property at that time, “Inside Lorne 
House retains much of its former character, fine woodwork, graceful pillars, 
handsome staircase and windows.” (Weekly Times, 07/09/1972, p.5). 
 
After 1972, the property was bought by a local group of financial companies and 
since 1982 it has been used as offices for ‘Lorne House Trust Limited’ and there are 
also apartments in the building. 
 
In 2007 the house was sold to Roy & Susan Tilleard, who stripped away the various 
additions and alterations to ‘reveal the spirit and quality of the original house’. After 
extensive restoration work the house was initially used as an office and conference 

building with the former kitchen and bedroom wing as a house. The house then 
reverted to residential use. The walled kitchen garden remains intact (Tutt P. 2013). 
 
The stables 
 
In addition to the main house, the estate included two lodge houses or stables, 
which are now in separate ownership. 
 
It would appear that the stones used in the construction of the stables were 
previously used in the ancient keeil which was located at the north end of the site.  
This information was provided to a local newspaper by Mr. Leighton Stowell (a 
retired headmaster who had worked at Lorne House when it was ran by the Christian 
Endeavour Holiday Homes Limited; 
 
“…when Colonel John Ready lived there he decided it was not right that the ruins of 
the keeil Woirrey (Church of Mary) should be allowed to remain so close to Gallows 
Hill, until 1860 the place of public execution.  So the stones were used to build the 
stables.” (Weekly Times, 07/09/1972, p.5). 
 
SOURCES AND REFERENCES 
 
Books and Articles 
 
A Six Day’s Tour through the Isle of Man, By a Stranger, 1836.  (The presumed 
author was the architect, John Welch). 
 
Dearden S. & Hassell K., 1996, The Isle of Man – A Postcard Tour.  Volume Two – 
Douglas & the East. 
 
Hulme P.J., 1990, Government Houses in the Isle of Man. 
 
Kitto J., 1990, Historic Homes of the Isle of Man. 
 
Kniveton G.N. (ed), 1997, An Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Isle of Man. 
 
Moore A.W., 1889, Manx Families – Goldie-Taubman’s of the Nunnery. 
 
Moore T.M., IoMNHAS Vol.7 No.4 p.686/705, Social Aspects of Castletown in the 
18th and 19th Centuries. 
 
Qualtrough J.D., 1950, Castletown – Some Notes on its History. 
 
Ralfe P.G., IoMNHAS Vol.3 No.3 p.208/217, Notes of Old Castletown. 
 
Rodgers K., 1998, Our Heritage – This Was Our Island. 
 
Tutt, P., 2010, Lorne House - A Manx Survivor. 
 
Tutt, P., 2013, An Introduction to the Architecture of the Isle of Man. 
 
Wilkinson G., c.1845, Five Lithographic Views in the Isle of Man. 
 

Wilson T.L., May 1999, Civic and Public Architecture of the Isle of Man, 1870-1940. 
(Dissertation submitted for the degree of Master of Arts in History and Design at the 
University of Central England in Birmingham). 
 
Maps and Plans 
 
1867 Wood’s Atlas, DOI. 
 
1869 Ordnance Survey, DOI & www.old-maps.co.uk 
 
Current digital map, DOI. 
 
Directories 
 
 
Pigot’s Directory, 1837 
 
Slater’s Directory, 1846 
 
Slater’s Directory, 1857 
 
Thwaite’s Directory, 1863 
 
Brown’s Directory, 1881 
 
Porter’s Directory, 1889 
 
Other Sources 
 
A Manx Note Book website. 
www.isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook 
 
 
Photographs 
 
Garden Elevation 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Garden Elevation (Tutt P. 2010) 
 

 
East elevation 
 

 
 
 
 
Porch (Tutt, P. 2010)                Archway & Lookout (Tutt, P. 2010) 
 
Interior 
 

 
Staircase (Tutt, P. 2010) 
 

 
Stained glass and fluted columnettes in the porch. (Tutt, P. 2010) 
 
 
Hallway (Tutt, P. 2010) 

 
 
 
THE GROUNDS IN 1878 
 
The layout of the garden was faithfully recorded on the 1878 OS map, except for the 
detailed placement of trees, but note that the carriage drive has trees along one 
side. The green area was cut from the walled garden by Surgeon-General Stevenson, 
who reused the walling material to create the walled garden area shaded blue (now 
the herb garden). The paths through the garden today are all substantially as shown 
here, with the path from the house to the gate in the wall near the bridge still much 
in use. The flagstaff on the hill was a hangover from the Government House period. 
A cannon was placed beside it in 1846 by John Ready, who had it fired once when 
he left the island and twice when he returned. Unfortunately, the lifeboat crew 
tended to assume it was a maroon calling them into service, so it had to be silenced. 
In 1962 some inebriated guests liberated it and placed it beside the front door. It 
disappeared following the auction of the contents in 1993. NB: The section of 
Douglas Street alongside the harbour is usually known as Bridge Street. (Tutt 2010) 
 

 
 
Lorne House, 18 May 2009. Aerial photograph  
 
The green space, including the regular layout of the kitchen garden and the 
continuous canopy of trees, marks the current extent of the grounds of Lorne House, 
with the house at the centre. This aerial view clearly shows how well the house is 
shielded from the town, and how dominant the house and grounds are on the 
promontory formed between the Silverburn River and Castletown Bay. Castle Rushen 
is in the bottom left of the photograph. The bridge referred to in historical deeds was 
on the site of the present pedestrian swing bridge at the bottom of the photo. (Tutt 
2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Boundary of Registered Building
```
