# RB 222

Clucas Laundry Old Engine Room, Chimneys and Sluices, Tromode

## Parish
Onchan

## Registration date
13/05/2004

## Extracted details
* Architects: Ashley Pettit Architects
* Construction: about 1790 – 1933
* Reasons for registration:
  - special architectural and historic interest
  - importance as a landmark
  - group value of a collection of buildings
  - age and rarity


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/632783/0500222regbld-clucas-laundry-old-engine-room-add.pdf

## OCR
```
Registered Building No, 222
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1991
‘THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1991
To: Clucas PLC., Tromode Industrial Estate, Carrs Lane, Tromode, Onchan.
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 15" November 2004, the
PLANNING COMMITTEE of the Department of Local Government and the Environment, in
pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and Regulations confirmed Registration of the
following elements :
The Two Chimneys and Switch Room (also known as the Old Engine Room) at Clucas
Laundry, Tromode Industrial Estate, Carrs Lane, Tromode, Onchan.
as represented by the buildings shown outlined in red on the plan hereto attached, in the
PROTECTED BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason of their special architectural and historic
interest.
‘Note: This notice supersedes and replaces that issued on 13" May 2004,
The effect of this notice is to maintain prohibition of the alteration, demolition or change of
appearance ofthe Registered elements (namely the Two Chimneys and Switch Room (also known
as the Old Engine Room) except ini compliance with an obligation imposed by or under any
statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning Committee whilst removing
from the Register the Mill Race, Sluices and Leats.
Dated this 6" day of January 2005
By Order of the Committee
Gauo(alibs
J Callow
Secretary, Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IMI 2SF.

NOTE: An appeal against this decision may
be made in writing to the Minister ofDLGE within 21 days
ofthe date ofthis notice.
To:
‘The Directors, Chucas plc, Tromode Industrial Estate, Carrs Lane, Tromode, Onchan
James Quinn & Co Advocates, 4* Floor, Victory House, Prospect Hill, Douglas, IM] 1EQ
‘The Director, Manx National Heritage, Kingswood Grove, Douglas
Clerk to Onchan District Commissioners, Hawthorn Villa, 79 Main Rosd, Onchan, IM3 1RD_
Advisory Council on Planning and the Environment, Marjon House, 52 Alberta Drive, Onchan, IM3 1LX
Richard Green Associates,
Ocean House, 87 Circular
Road, Douglas, IMI 1AX.


TROMODE FLAX MILL
In 1825, Moore, whose family had owned the Pulrose Estate for over 300 years,
bought the Cronkbourne Estate in Braddan and founded a linen factory there,
alongwith a bleach works.
Moore's linen mills were established in 1790 with works originally both at Tromode
and Factory Lane (now Drumgold Street), Douglas. Processes on the first site
inéluded scotching, spinning, weaving (both hand and machine) and bleaching while
the products ranged from coarse sacking to fine damask figured with three-legs
emblems. One of its later claims to fame was to provide the sails of Brunel’s “Great
Britain” and sailcloth for the British Navy. Manx flax was later replaced by imports
from the Baltic
‘The factory became a laundry (Clucas’), a needed support trade for the industry,
supplemented by brush-making in the winter. Initially it still drew on the mill dam for
water.
Samples of the canvas produced are preserved in the “Star of India” in San Diego,
California, U.S.A. and in the Manx Museum which also has the factory bell. Copies
of the very strict rules goveming the workers came from Northem Ireland — the
independent Manx apparently would not allow their children to do factory work
which might involve crawling around the machines. The majority of the workers lived
in one of the few examples of industrial housing in the Island, Cronkboume Village.
Moore’s works at Tromode was the longest surviving of the Islands’s flax mills, and
one of the few to introduce a real flavour of industrialisation to the Isle of Man. Its
products show an interesting development from a wide diversity of household goods
to @ specialisation in sailcloth, which was of so high a quality as to warrant an
Admirality contract and to be used on Brunel’s Great Britain, As Strutt told the
Factories Inquiry Commission in 1833, “small fines” were used to maintain
discipline. The “crimes” also show a similarity to those recorded in Strutt’s Quatterly
wages book, 1801-1805, though the Manx fines seem to have been lower. The

Tromode hands were provided by their employer, with a cricket club for the summer,
and a reading room for the winter.
In 1851, of a total of about eighty manual workers, some thirty were Irish, two were
English and one Scot. Some skilled workers were recruited
from the Irish linen trade.
In 1861, William Moore is recorded as employing one hundred and fifty workers in
all. In 1851, both hand and power-loom weavers were recorded as being employed.
Tromode was the largest of the flax mills on the Island, which originally made
“sheeting, towel-ling, sailcloth and sackcloth”, but since about 1850, sailcloth only.
Cotton nets for the herring industry were also made there between 1852-1866.
The works closed in 1905,
Moore is recorded as being the largest employer of labour on the Island, exclusive of
the mines, no one has done more than him to develop the industries of the Island.
Moore, was head of the firm W-F. Moore and Son and held the position of Speaker of
the House of Keys.
REFERENCES:
Industrial Archaelogy ofthe Isle of Man — Flax Processing p.32
Industrial Archaelogy ofthe Isle of Man: 1972
Garrard, Bawden, Qualtrough and Scatchard — Flax-processing and the Linen Trade
p.l7L-5
An Illustrated Encyclopedia ofthe Isle of Man:1997
Gordon N. Kniveton (Bd.)
www isle-of-man.com/manxotebook
G

THE CHIMNEYS
There are two chimneys on the site, the first, a stone built structure on the
‘surface of the rock dates from the time of the Sailcloth Mill and the second, a
tall brick-built structure was constructed during the lifetime of Clucas’ Laundry.
A lithograph (c.1850) is included with this report; the view is looking up the
river towards the factory and village from Cronkbourne House, the bridge in
the foreground is illustrated on the 1868 Ordnance Survey map as the bridge
adjacent to the offices. The lithograph includes three chimneys on the site but
the 1868 map makes no reference to chimneys at the factory, despite
including a chimney and flagstaff near to Cronkbourne House.
The Cliff Face Chimney
This is the older chimney of the two and there is clearly a chimney visible at
the top of this cliff on the lithograph (c.1850), possibly an extension of what
remains today. The chimney is not visible on a photograph taken of the site
dating from 1900, but this is possibly due to the overgrown surrounding area.
The house visible on the clff face in this picture still remains today, this house
was constructed by the time the Ordnance Survey map of 1868 was surveyed
but it is highly likely that this house was not built until this chimney was
abandoned due to the toxic fumes.
Today little remains of the chimney except for a series of holes and shafts on
the surface of the rock, also the damping plate is still in place. It is quite
apparent that there were once underground ducts from the base of the
chimney to the adjacent boiler house which today contains two large boilers.
The Brick Chimney
This chirnney was constructed in 1933 and therefore it does not date from the
time of the sailcloth mill, A lithograph of Cronkbourne Village (c.1850)
includes a view of the mill and there appears to be a chimney on this site in
this picture but it is unclear on the 1868 Ordnance Survey map whether a
chimney existed here then, a photograph of the site c.1900 clearly shows that
there was no chimney (certainly not of this size) on this spot at that time.
Due to its size, the chimney could possibly be classified as a landmark
structure. However, as a result of the position of the mill in a valley, its
distance from the main road and the growth of the surrounding industrial
estate and housing, the chimney is not a notable feature from the main road.
‘At some point in the past the chimney has been repaired with metal tie bands
and it could be maintained for many years to come but it will eventually need
either major refurbishment or replacement.

THE CHIMNEYS:
There are two chimneys on the site, the first, a stone built structure on the
‘surface of the rock dates from the time of the Sailcloth Mill and the second, a
tall brick-built structure was constructed during the lifetime of Clucas’ Laundry.
A lithograph (c.1850) is included with this report, the view is looking up the
river towards the factory and village from Cronkbourne House, the bridge in
the foregroundis illustrated on the 1868 Ordnance Survey map as the bridge
adjacent to the offices. The lithograph includes three chimneys on the site but
the 1868 map makes no reference to chimneys at the factory, despite
including a chimney and flagstaff near to Cronkbourne House.
The Cliff Face Chimney
This is the older chimney of the two and there is clearlya chimney visible at
the top of this cliff on the lithograph (c.1850), possibly an extension of what
remains today. The chimney is not visible on a photograph taken of the site
dating from 1900, but this is possibly due to the overgrown surrounding area.
The house visible on the cliff face in this picture still remains today, this house
was constructed by the time the Ordnance Survey map of 1868 was surveyed
but it is highly likely that this house was not built until this chimney was
abandoned due to the toxic fumes.
Today little remains of the chimney except for a series of holes and shafts on
the surface of the rock, also the damping plate is still in place. itis quite
apparent that there were once underground ducts from the base of the
chimney to the adjacent boiler house which today contains two large boilers.
The Brick Chimney
This chimney was constructed in 1933 and therefore it does not date from the
time of the sallcloth mill. A lithograph of Cronkboume Village (c.1850)
includes a view of the mill and there appears to be a chimney on this site in
this picture but it is unciear on the 1868 Ordnance Survey map whether a
chimney existed here then, a photograph of the site c.1900 clearly shows that
there was no chimney (certainly not of this size) on this spot at that time.
Due to its size, the chimney could possibly be classified as a landmark
structure. However, as a result of the position of the mill in a valley, its
distance from the main road and the growth of the surrounding industrial
estate and housing, the chimney is not a notable feature from the main road.
At some point in the past the chimney has been repaired with metal tie bands
and it could be maintained for many years to come but it will eventually need
either major refurbishment or replacement.




Department of Local Government and the Environment
Rheynn Reiltys Ynnydagh as y Chymmyltaght
Murray House,
‘Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
Isle of Man,
IM1 2SF.
email: ceo@dige.gov.im
Tel: (01624) 685859
Fax: (01624) 685873
Chief Executive:
R. A. Hamilton,
AIPD, MCMI
Please reply to the Chief Executive
Our ref: RAH/MC 12° April 2006.
Dear Sir/Madam,
ON APPEAL: Registered Building No. 222 ~ 2 chimneys and switch room
(also known as the Old Engine Room) at Clucas Laundry, Tromode
Industrial Estate, Carrs Lane, Tromode, Onchan
I refer to the recent appeal hearing in respect ofthe above planning application.
In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7(5) of Schedule 1 to the Isle of
Man Planning Scheme (Development Pian) Order 1982, I am enclosing herewith a
copy of the report of the person appointed to hear this appeal.
I am directed to advise you that the Minister, having considered the report, has
agreed to accept the recommendation of the appointed person. Accordingly, he
has directed that the appeal be allowed In respect
of the brick chimney, and that
chimney be removed from the Protected Buildings Register. However, he has
directed that the appeal be dismissed, in so far as it relates to the stone chimney and
the switch room, with the effect that the inclusion of thase buildings on the said
Register be confirmed.
af ly,
LL
Chief Executive.
Please see over for circulation list/......

rR
Circulation List — RB222
NOMseN
Mr. 3. Quinn, James Quinn & Co., Advocates, 11 Myrtle Street, Douglas (Your
ref: JBSQ/LCI/CLO13.01);
Richard Green Associates, 87 Circular Road, Douglas, IM1 1AX;
Onchan District commissioners;
Mr. A. Johnson, Manx National Heritage, Manx MuseLim, Douglas;
Highways & Traffic Division, Department of Transport;
Tan Mansell, Environmental Health officer, DLGE;
Advisory Council on Planning & the Environment, Marjon House, 52 Alberta
Drive, Onchan, IM3 1X;
JOM Water Authority, Tromode Road, Douglas;
Ashley Pettit Architects, 4 Osborne Terrace, Douglas, IM1 3LH;
Secretary, Planning Committee;
Chairman and Members ofthe Planning Committee;
Conservation Officer, DLGE;
Secretary, Planning Appeals Inspectorate;
Mr. T. O'Hanlon, Treasury;
‘The Editor, Isle of Man Newspapers, Peel Road, Douglas;
Manx Radio Newsroom, Douglas Head, Douglas;
Ms, J. Green, Apt 5, Greenhill, Stanley Mount West, Ramsey, IM8 1LR;
Radio 3FM, 45 Victoria Street, Douglas, IM1 3RS;
Energy FM, 100 Market Street, Douglas, IM1 1PH.

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
‘The Site and the Registered
Buildings
1
The Clucas Laundry forms part of an extensive complex of industrial buildings
lying to the north of Johnny Watterson Lane and east of the River Glass. The
industrial use of this site began in about 1790. In the first half of the nineteenth
century the flax mill here produced linen sheeting, but from the 1850s onwards the
works concentrated on the manufacture of sailcloth Among
other things, the
factory produced the sails for Brunel’s “Great Britain” and supplied sailcloth
to the
Royal Navy. Workers were housed nearby in Cronkbourme Village, which was
developed by the factory owners and completed in about 1850. In the second
half
of the nineteenth century, the sailcloth mill became one of the first industrial
businesses to generate and use electrical power.
By the end of the nineteenth century the demand for sailcloth was falling as
steamships
gained supremacy. As a result the Tromode Sailcloth Mill closed
in
1906. However, in 1911, the factory was re-occupied
by the Clucas Laundry,
which provided a vital service to the Isle of Man’s growing tourist industry. The
laundry eventually closed in 2002, and the owners now propose to redevelop the
site with modem industrial
units.
‘The appeal is against the registration of three, closely grouped buildings, within the
Clucas Laundry site. The oldest of these is the remnant of a Victorian stone
chimney flue, which abuts the cliff face that forms the eastern edge of the site, The
flue appears to have provided a fink between a boiler house in the former sailcloth
mull, and a venting chimney on the cliff top. The stone base ofthe cliff top chimney
remains in place, but is in a different ownership and is not registered The
registered flue is in a ruinous condition, consisting of an array of holes and shafts
within
a masonry stack.
‘The Old Engine Room is an industrial building dating from about 1870. It 1s
mainly of stone construction, with slate walls and sandstone lintels, but with brick
window jambs. It has a pitched roof, although the original roofing material has now
been replaced by asbestos sheeting. The building measures about 6m by 3m, and
has a first-floor extending over part of its area. It is in a reasonably
sound condition.
and is watertight. It originally housed a steam engine, and was more recently used
as the electrical switch room for the Clucas Laundry.

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
5 The third of the registered buildings is an octagonal, free-standing, brick chimncy,
which was erected in 1933 to serve the laundry's pump house, The chimney
has a
current height of about 24 &m. However, I understand that it was originally over
31m high, its upper parts having been removed for safety reasons in the 1970s and
1980s. A steel efflux cone bas been fitted at the top of the single flue. The
chimney is gurdled by a series of steel restraining bands. It is in need of some repair
and re-pointing, exhibiting a number of cracks.
6 The site is set in a natural depression between the River Glass and the oliff that
marks its eastern
edge. As a result, the brick chimney is frequently screened in
local views. When visible, it is seldom seen against the sky, more frequently
emerging from a backcloth of other buildings. It can be seen from the northem end
of Tromode Road, and from various locations in Johnny Watterson’s Lane,
Castleward Green, Nobles Hospital, Ballafletcher Farm Road and Ballafletcher
Road, as well as from within the Tromode Industrial Estate.
The Case for the Appellants
7 In 2002 the applicants applied for approval in principle to demolish certain
buildings in the Tromode Industrial Estate, and to erect 3 light mdustrial
units,
Although this approval was subsequently granted, it excluded
the demolition of
certain buildings that had been recommended for registration. These included the
buildings that are the subject of the present appeal, which were placed on the
Protected Buildings Register by Order dated 13 May 2004 (Doc 1, Appendix 6).
Legal Defect in Registration
8 Contrary to Rule 4 of the Registered Buildings Regulations 1991, the Register
contains no particulars
of the special architectural
or historic interest of these three
buildings. The appellants are prejudiced by this breach of the legal requirements,
in
that they know neither the reasons for registration nor the case they have to meet.
9 When the applicants asked the Planning Committee to provide them with this
information, they were sent a report of the research carried out by Ashley Pettit,
Architects,
in 2003 (Doc 1, Appendix 10). The report concluded
as follows:
Historically the most important feature is the old stone chimney which could be
registered but now it is only a shadow of its former self... The tall brick
chimney could be questioned to be a landmark due to its size, however it is not a
notable feature on the landscape and hidden from view of the main road. This
chimney has already been repaired m the past with metal tie bands and
eventually
it could become a costly structure, needing either mejor
refurbishment
or replacement,
This scarcely suggests that either of the chimneys should be registered.

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
10 In the appellants’ view, there is insufficient architectural or historic interest to
justify
the registration of any of these three buildings. The Department
of Local
Government and the Environment’s Planning Policy Statement 1/01 deals with the
conservation of the historic environment. Policy RB/I sets out the considerations
that are to be taken into account in assessing the merits of a building with regard to
its possible registration.
Architectural Interest and Aesthetic Value
11 The first consideration is the building’s architectural interest and/or aesthetic
quality. However, none of the three buildings are of particular architectural or
aesthetic merit. The Ashley Pettit report attaches importance only to the historical
value of the stone chimney, and the importance (or otherwise) of the brick chimney
as a landmark. There is nothing special about these buildings in terms of their
design, decoration or craftsmanship; or the eminence of their architects. The brick
chimney origmally had an attractive corbelled capping, but this has now been
removed, The switch room is constructed in local stone, with window jambs of
Jocal brick. Itis not unusual, Its original roof has been replaced.
Historic Interest
12 The second consideration is the building's historic interest. In its original
state, the
stone cliff-face chimney might well have been worthy of registration as a vestige of
the historic sailcloth mill. However, the Ashley Pettit report properly describes it as.
a “shadow
of its former self’. In its present ruined condition it has little historical
interest. Until recently it was overgrown with weeds. Such interest
as it has would
be better preserved by proper recording than by preservation, especially as the
structure
is beyond repair.
13 The 1933 brick chimney is a relatively modern structure. It has no real historic
interest, having been built to serve the laundry rather than the earlier sail cloth mill.
14 The switch room was originally built to house a stream engine. It would
be of
historic importance, were the engine still in place; but it is not. ‘The original slate
roof was replaced with corrugated asbestos sheeting in about 1962, so the structure
is no longer intact as an example of a mid-Victorian industrial building. It has no
greater significance than any of the other mill buildings which will be demolished
to facilitate the redevelopment
of the site.
15 There is no functional link between the three registered buildings. They were built
at different times for different purposes, and do not stand together as an historic
entity. They have no group value. Although the old sailcloth mill was owned and
managed by members of the Moore family, the stone chimney flue and switch room
have no particular historical associations of a personal nature with the family.

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
16 The buildings
are not readily accessible
to the public. Members ofthe Victorian
Society have visited the site only once in the last 15 years. This suggests
that the
buildings
are not of major interest. It is not clear that they would attract
any more
interest
in future.
a
17 Although it has been claimed that the brick chimney constitutes a landmark, this is
disputed, As the Ashley Pettit report concluded, “it is not a notable feature on the
landscape and hidden from view of the main road”. Policy RB/I indicates that
“some buildings will be clearly recognised
as having landmark qualities whether
they be located in isotated coastal or rural locations, or as focal points within a busy
local townscape”. The brick chimney has none of these characteristics.
Photographs taken from various points in the surrounding area show that its visual
impact is quite limited (Doc 1, Appendices 14 and 15)
‘Age and Rarity
18 The final considerations listed in Policy RB/I are the building's age and rarity. The
policy makes it clear that buildings dating
from between 1800 and 1860 may be
worthy of registration, although
even then some selection
will be necessary.
However, only the best examples of later buildings will qualify
for registration. On
this basis, none of the buildings at the Clucas site automatically qualify
19 The two chimneys now have a certain rarity value in the context of the Isle of Man.
A number of industrial chimneys have been demolished elsewhere on the Island,
though
a few remain. It is not clear why the truncated brick chimney on the Clucas
site should be considered any more worthy of preservation than some that have
recently
been demolished.
Future Use and Maintenance
20 Policy RB/6 of Planning Policy Statement 1/01 indicates that the value to be
derived from the continued use of a registered building will be among the factors to
be taken into account
in considering applications for demolition. None ofthe three
registered buildings on the Clucas site is used at preseat, and there is no practical
use to which they are likely be put. They will look out of place on a modem
industrial estate, There is no realistic alternative use for either of the chimneys,
‘The switch room could be used for some form storage, but its design, size and
location do not make it particularly suitable or attractive for such a use.
21 Polioy RBV6 indicates that another factor to be taken into account in assessing
applications for the demolition of a registered building is the condition of its fabric
and the cost of its repair and maintenance. A recent inspection
by a fim of
steeplejacks indicates that about £43,000 now needs to be spent on essential
‘maintenance to the brick chimney (Doc 1, Appendix 12). The inspection excluded

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
an internal examination of the chimney, and the sum quoted may therefore be an
underestimate. If the structure is retained, it will be necessary for specialist
Surveyors to carry out inspections every two years., The cost of such inspections
varies according to whether the surveyor is already visiting the Isle of Man for other
purposes, but one quotation as high as £11,750 has been received. The chimney
‘would generate no income to offset these costs.
22 In addition there would be an annual insurance premium to pay. In the past,
the
brick chimney had been seen to sway in strong winds, and glass “tell tales”
cemented to the structure have fallen off. Since
the 1960s, restraining
bands have
been progressively installed to contain the cracks in its fabric There might well be
health and safety concems if the structure were to be retained indefinitely.
23 Although the Government may pay a grant of 60% of the cost of maintaining a
registered building up to a maximum of £20,000, this is discretionary, anda
maximum
payment is not guaranteed. Clucas plc would have to bear the balance of
any costs incurred. ‘The company would derive no benefit from maintaining
‘buildings
for which there is no use.
24 The company have offered to sell the brick chimney to the Victorian Society or to
‘the Government for a nominal sum, but neither body has shown a firm interest,
presumably because the future cost of maintenance and repair would be too high. If
the present appeal is unsuccessful, the company will immediately
apply for
permission to demolish these registered buildings. In the light of Policy RB/6, there
is good reason to expect that permission will be granted. In the circumstances,
the
registration of the buildings would appear to serve no useful purpose. Accordingly
the Minister is asked to allow the appeal and remove all three buildings from the
Protected Buildings Register.
The Case for the Planning Committee
25 A Building Preservation Notice protecting the two chimneys was served on Clucas
ple in December 2002, following the Onchan District Commissioners’
Tecommendation
that the brick chimney be registered. In 2004, following further
research into the historic value of the site, the Committee formally registered both
chimneys, and the associated switch room and sluices. An application
for the de-
registration of these structures resulted in the removal of the mill race, sluices and
Jeats from the Register, However, the registration of the two chimneys and switch
room was confirmed
in January 2005.
Reasons for Registration
26 Policy RB/t ofthe Planning Policy Statement 1/01 (“Policy Guidance Notes for the
Conservation of the Historic Environment of the Isle of Man”) sets out the
considerations which are to be taken into account in assessing the merits of a

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
28
29
30
31
building with a view to its registration. The first of these is the building’s
architectural
interest and/or aesthetic quality. The buildings
on the Clucas Laundry
site are of undoubted architectural interest and aesthetic qua lify, being characterised
by the use of fine materials and good detailing. This is exemplified
by the use of
brick window jambs, sandstone lintels and high quality stonework in slate
The second factor listed in Policy RB/I is the building’s historic interest. ‘The
lucas Laundry represents one of the most significant groups of industrial
to survive on the Isle of Man. First used for the production of linen and sailcloth
in
the nineteenth century, in the twentieth century the mill buildings were used es a
commercial Jaundry, and were of particular importance to the hotel and boarding
house trade. In the nineteenth century, the mull had close associations with the
Moore family,
and was of such a scale that its workforce (wiich numbered
up to
150) required specially built industrial housing at Conkbourne Village.
A third factor listed in Policy RB/I turns on the building's importance as a
landmark. The brick chimney provides a focal point that is visible both from within
the Tromode Industrial Estate, and from vantage points elsewhere, including
Road/Johnny Watterson Lane junction (Doc 2, Appendix G).
Policy RB/1 also refers to the group value of a collection of buildings. The
registered buildings at the Clucas Laundry help illustrate the important pert that this
site played in the industrial history of the Isle of Man.
‘The final consideration listed in Policy RB/1 is the age and rarity of the building,
Buildings dating from before 1800, which survive in substantially their original
condition, are likely to be worthy of registration. Buildings
built between 1800 and
1860 may be worthy of registration, although some selection will be necessary
Greater numbers of buildings erected between 1860 and 1920 survive, so only the
best examples will be identified for registration. For the same reason, only selected
buildings erected after 1920 will be registered.
As the only purpose-built industrial complex of its type remaining on the Isle of
Man, the group of registered buildings on the Clucas Laundry site is certainly a
rarity. The stone split-flue chimney is one of the oldest industrial flues on the
Island, Although the top section of this chimney has now been lost, it is shown in a
nineteenth century lithograph (Doc 2, Appendix K). The twentieth
century brick
chimney serves as a reminder of the progression of technology during the life of
this industrial
site. Few industrial chimneys now remain on the Isle of Man, The
octagonal brick chimney at the Clucas site has no counterpart
Future Maintenance
and Use
32
The historic Buildings Conservation Scheme 2000 provides grant assistance for the
maintenance
of historic buildings. The grant can cover up to 60% of the cost of

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
works up to a maximum of £20,000, Additional money could be paid to employ a
suitably qualified professional to supervise the execution
of works,
33. The appellants’ argument that the brick chimney has no future use is not necessarily
accepted. For instance, it could possibly be used as « tower for telecommunications
aerials, ‘The appellants concede that the switch room could be used for storage.
34 In the circumstances, the buildings are considered to be worthy of registration, and
there is no certainty that an application for their demolition would be successful.
‘The Minister is requested to dismiss the appeal.
The Case for the Onchan District Commissioners and for the Advisory Council on
Planning and the Environment
35 Mr Kelly presented a joint case for the Commissioners and the Advisory Council,
who each support the registration of all three buildings.
36 ©The Commissioners had first recommended registration of the brick chimney as
they considered this to be an important landmark It is a familiar
sight in the
locality,
being visible from Abbotswood,
Castleward Green, Nobles Hospital,
the
Oak Wood and Balafletcher
Road.
37 Although the top of the chimney was removed in the 1980s, a conical cap has been
added, restoring some of the height that had been lost. The redevelopment
of the
Tromode Industrial Estate would permit enhanced views of the brick chimney,
which should provide a focal point for the site, In a similar way, the free-standing
1901 clock tower has been used as a focus for the Clock Tower Industrial Estate at
Foxdale. There is also a parallel with the preservation of the spire of St Andrew's
Church, Finch Road, Douglas, after the remainder of that church was demolished.
38 The chimney, which was built in 1933 using bricks from the Glenfaba Brickworks
at Peel, is the last remaining industrial chimney in Onchan, and is one of only a few
left on the Isle of Man. It is the tallest (and the sole octagonal) brick chimney on
the Island. It is of historic importance
as a reminder of Clucas’s Laundry, which
was by far the largest commercial laundry on the Island. The erection
of the brick
chimney marked the installation of the large boilers associated with the change
from water power to steam power.
39 The stone chimney/flue on the cliff-face has its own importance as a relic of the
earlier history of this site as a sailcloth mill. There is documentary evidence to
indicate that the chimney was built shortly after 1850. It is depicted
in a lithograph
from about
that date. The fact that “it is a shadow of its former self” is not a
sufficient reason for its de-registration. Its method of construction
and unusual
inclination can still be seen and should be preserved for future generations,

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
40 The Old Engine House is also a token of the former sailcloth mill. The mill played
an important part in the in the social history of the Isle of Man, being the site of the
first electricity generating station on the Island The Old Engine House is a fine
building. Its walls are of a local slate, which was quarried on the far side of the
River Glass. The sandstone forming its window lintels was imported from
Whitchaven
in Cumbria The bricks used in 1ts window jambs, were from the local
Ballanard Brickworks. They were of a type used elsewhere in the locality, for
instance
in Braddan School.
41 The registration of a building does not rest on the ability of its owner to finance its
maintenance. Financial assistance for this purpose is available through the
Department of Local Government and the Environment. In the circumstances,
the
Minister is requested to dismiss the appeal and confirm the registration of all tree
buildings.
The Case for Manx National Heritage
42 Manx National Heritage supports the registration
of these structures The Clucas
Laundry site contains one of the most significant groups of industrial buildings to
survive
on the Isle of Man, ‘The site had originally been used for the production of
linen, and iater sailcloth. The mull was credited with producing the sails for
Brunel’s “Great Britain” as well as for mmerous Royal Navy warships and Manx
fishing vessels. Following the decline ofthe sailcloth industry, the site was usedas
a commercial laundry, washing huge quantities of bed-Lnen and table-linen for the
hospitality
trade every day. In view of the historical importance of the buildings
‘themselves, and the part they played in the economic and social development of the
Isle of Man, the Minister is asked to dismiss the appeal.
Conclusions
43 There appears to be a defect in the registration of the three buildings that are the
subject of the present appeal, since the relevant entries in the Register contain no
particulars of the special architectural or historic interest of the buildings as
required by Rule 4 of the Registered Buildings Regulations 1991. However, it
seems to me that that matter can be easily rectified Ido not consider the appellants
to have been significantly prejudiced by this defect. The special architectural or
historic interest of the three buildings was clearly explained in the Planning
Committee’s
evidence to the inquiry.
44 In my view, the stone chimney flue adjacent to the cliff-face has undoubted
importance as a remnant of the sailcloth mill that has played such a significant part
in Manx history. Although I acknowledge that this chimney is now “a shadow of
its former self” the same might be said of Stonehenge. the Colosseum or the
Parthenon. It does not necessarily tell against the preservation of that which

APPEAL NO; AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
45
46
47
48
49
remains, The evidence is that the chimney dates from about 1850. I consider that
its age and its value as a piece of industrial archaeology tell in favour of its
registration. I have seen no evidence to suggest that the retention of the stone flue
would interfere significantly with
the planned redevelopment
of the site. It seems
to me to be most regrettable that it has become overgrown in the past through
neglect.
The switch room, which dates from about 1870, is also a vestige of the former
sailcloth mill, Although
it has been subject to some alterations, including the
replacement of its original roof with asbestos sheeting, it is largely intact and in a
reasonable state of preservation. It provides a good example
of an industrial
building of the period, largely constructed in local materials. Whilst
it may not be
ideally suited to modern commercial use, the building is watertight and is plainly
capable of continued use of some sort. I conclude that the stone chimney and the
switch room are worthy of registration, and that the appeal should be dismissed in
respect
of these structures.
do not consider the case for the registration of the briok chimney to be so clear cut.
This structure, which dates from 1933, has no association with the historic sailcloth
mill, having been built for the purposes of the more recent laundry. In my view,
it
has little architectural
merit or aesthetic appeal. Although
it is visible from various
places in the surrounding area, it is most often secn against the backdrop of other
buildings. Its value as a landmark has been reduced with its loss of height.
However, I accept that it is a rarity, being the highest of the few remaining brick
industrial chimneys on the Isle of Man, and the only such chimney that is octagonal
in plan,
‘The retention of this structure would clearly entail a considerable ongoing financial
commitment. I have no reason to question that essential repairs that are currently
required would cost about £43,000. That figure might well increase following an
internal inspection
of the chimney. Further periodic inspections would be needed im
future, and these might well reveal the need for further expensive repair work to
secure the continued integrity of the structure and the safety of those who come
near
it, The cost of insuring such a structure might also be significant.
I accept that the appellants have no use for the chimney, and see no prospect of
securing
any income from it There is no evidence to suggest that any
telecommunications operator wishes to use it to carry aerials, even if such a use of
the registered building were to be permitted. I cannot immediately
envisage any
use of this structure that would generate an income sufficient to offset its potential
ongoing maintenance costs.
Those costs would have to be bore by the private owners, and possibly by the
public through
grant aid. I note that the Government declined to buy the property
for a nomunal sum, and thereby accept total responsibility for its future
maintenance. On balance, I am not persuaded that the benefits of preserving this

APPEAL NO: AP2518
SUBJECT: RB222
structure justify the high and continuing maintenance costs that are likely to be
incurred. Accordingly, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed, insofar as it
relates to the registration of the brick chimney.
Recommendation
50 [recommend that the appeal be allowed in respect of the brick chimney,
and that
that chimney be removed from the Protected Buildings Register. However,I
recommend that the appeal be dismissed, insofar as it relates to the stone chimney
and the switch room, with the effect that the inclusion of those buildings on the
Register
be confirmed.
Pde oro
MICHAEL HURLEY
Inspector
APPEARANCES
For the Appellants
MrJ Quinn - James Quinn & Co, Advocates, 11 Myrtle Street, Douglas
He called:
MrP Smith
Mr A Kneale
MrR Green
For the Planning Committee
Mr $ Moore — Building Conservation Officer, DOLGE
For the Onchan District Commissioners and ADCO
MrP Kelly
For Manx National Heritage
MrA Johnson
10
```
