# RB 268

Glyn Moar, Glyn Moar Road, St Johns, IM4 3AQ

## Parish
German

## Registration date
18/09/2012

## Extracted details
* Architects: Patricia A Tutt
* Builders: Francis Matthews
* Construction: c1845
* Reasons for registration:
  - special architectural and historic interest
  - architecturally interesting and graciously proportioned mansion house
  - distinctive features of mid-nineteenth century Manx Gothic Revival style
  - un-restored and un-modernised
  - tiled floor believed to be by Minton
  - large garden with rare shrubs and large beeches


## Links
- https://www.gov.im/media/1346491/rb268-glyn-moar.pdf

## OCR
```
Form RB2
Registered Building No, 12/00268/REGBLD
we
a a infrastructure
Isle of Man planning and building control
. bun-troggelys ~ plannal as gurneil troggal
DEPARTMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING ACT 1999
THE REGISTERED BUILDINGS REGULATIONS 2005
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at a meeting held on the 18th September 2012, the Department of
Infrastructure, in pursuance of its powers under the above Acts and Regulations REGISTERED
Glyn Moar Glen Mooar Road St Johns Isle Of Man IM4 3AQ
as represented by the buildings delineated on the plan hereto attached, in the PROTECTED
BUILDINGS REGISTER by reason ofits special architectural and historic interest.
THE EFFECT OF THIS REGISTRATION IS IMMEDIATE and prohibits the alteration or demolition of
the structure or appearance of any part of the building except in compliance with an obligation
imposed by or under any statutory provision or with the prior written consent of the Planning
Authority.
Dated this 18th September 2012,
By Order of the Department
—
Deputy Secretary to the Planning Committee.
1* Floor, Murray House,
Mount Havelock,
Douglas,
IM1 2SF.

NOTE :
Under The Town and Country Planning Act 1999;
Schedule 2
The Protected Buildings Register
Notifications of entries
on register etc.
2. (1) As soon as may be after a building has been entered in the register, or the register has been
amended by removal of a building from it, the Department shall serve a notice on the owner and
the occupier of the building stating that It has been entered in or removed from the register.
(2) The owner or the occupier of, and any other person having an interest in, a building which has
been entered in the register may apply to the Department to remove the building from the
register-
(a) _ within the prescribed period after service on him of a notice under sub-paragraph (2);
(b) after the expiration of the prescribed period after the decision of the Department on a
previous request under subsection in relation to the building,
Under the Registered Building Regulations 2005
3. Periods for purpose of Schedule 2 paragraph 2(2)
(1). The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after notice of registration, within which owner or occupier may request de-registration) is 21
days.
(2) The period specified for the purposes of paragraph 2(2)(b) of Schedule 2 to the Act (period
after initial period, during which owner or occupier may not request a de-registration) is 5 years.
, 20 Westbourne Road, Ramsey, Isle Of Man, IM8 2EP
Director, Manx National Heritage
Isle Of Man Natural History & Antiquarian Society

REGISTERED BUILDING CONFIRMATION
NAME: Glyn Moar (aka Glen Mooar or Glyn Moore)
‘ADDRESS: Pat Clague’s Lane, Glen Mooar (Loop) Road, St Johns
POST CODE: M4 3A
LOCAL AUTHORITY: German Commissioners
GRID REF: 277821
Report by: Patricia A Tutt, Dip Arch, RIBA, ARPS
Contents
Short summary of findings 2
Introduction 3
History 5
Family and Politics 6
The name 8
The site 10
Description of the house u
Inlaid tiles 19
‘The gardens and farm buildings 25
Statement of significance 28
Recommendations 28
Bibliography, archive and sources 29
Page
| 7

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
Glyn Moar’ is a little documented, large, architecturally interesting house with some distinctive
features that place it in context with the development of the mid-nineteenth century Manx Gothic
Revival style. The house is significant for being largely un-restored and un-modernised. The main
Gothic Revival features are the stair window, the single windows in the attic rooms, all with pointed
arches, and the important large tiled floor (early Minton) in the impressive Hall. The large garden is
contemporary with the house and contains some of the largest beeches on the island and also has
some rare shrubs. Both house and garden are receiving only light maintenance and are vulnerable to.
the ravages of rampant plant growth. Although regularly used as a film set, the house is not
described in the literature on Manx houses.
oa v
Page
| 8
‘The porch front faces south-east. Stone-buitt in random rubble with paired sashes; unpainted stucco to porch
‘and window surrounds; slightly arched window heads; kneelers to gable and porch parapets; tablet above
door; some ridge tiles missing, broken or inappropriately replaced. The climbers and creepers reach to the roof
‘and have pushed through the eaves and between the slates into the roof and celing spaces. The darker
climber
to the left of the porch, reaching up to the roof, isa fuchsi
“The name varies ~ spellings
used replicate those in the relevant text

INTRODUCTION
Glyn Moar is a large detached three storey house with full basement
set in secluded landscaped
grounds close to Tynwald Hill (see maps, pages 7 to 9) in the Quarterland of Ballahowin in the
Ballydoyne Treen, German. The associated farm buildings appear not to have been in productive page | 9
agricultural use since the mid nineteenth century Little has been written about the house, which has
been owned by just two families since it was built. The mortgaged property was Inherited from the
Moore famity by Emily Eunice Corlett, whose husband, Francis Matthews Junior, paid off the
mortgage and together with his father, also Francis Matthews, acquired the continuing mortgage on
the adjoining glen and corn mill, both transactions being completed in 1841.
‘The house appears
to have been built c1845, but this is deduced rather than established.
‘The symmetrical south-west front with paired stacks overlooks a large lawn surrounded by trees and shrubs
including rhododendrons. On the north-east and south-east elevations the ground floor is at external level,
but on the north-west and south-west elevations, the ground floor is on a small elevated terrace created by
the basement excavation. All three ground floor rooms on this elevation (sitting room, dining room and
drawing room) open via French windows onto the terrace. The attic Gothic window in the central gable is
almost completely obscured by partheocissus (Virginia creeper).

Page | 10
‘The north-west elevation. Note the raised bank that the house sits on, Pointed Gothick
heads to stair and
second floor windows. Stair window head formed in stone, heads to first floor windows in brick, with only one
rendered over with stucco in-and-out work. Its possible that the bay window and all stucco work are later
additions. Kneelers to gable verge.

HISTORY
GLYN MOAR: Near St. John's, to the west of Tynwald Hill, on a road of unknown antiquity, branching
off
to the left from Bishop Wilson's highroad and going through the fields to Poortown, is a most
picturesque ford. It is on the lower part of the Rhenass River. It might well pass for the most secluded
and quiet spot on the Island. The timber around the mansion-houses of Glyn Moar and Ballachrink
‘shut it in, Slieu-whallin looks down on it. The splash of the mill-wheel
at Bal-na-awin mill (now Page | 11
Cornmill Cottage) anda glimpse of the whitewashed mill gable indicate the kind of human
neighbourhood.
(Of the southside mils the most picturesque are those of Kentraugh, Colby, and Grenaby; perhaps also
the Abbey mill at Ballasalla. Coming northwards there are two, each in their own way delightfully
picturesque, viz, that of Ballahawin, near St. John's, called
in the Rent Roll the “Mill of Tynwald" ; and
‘Mullen-e-Cly, called
in the Rent Roll the " Mill of Ballahiga,”" from the Treen land on which it stonds.
J Quine (1896-7) Ramsey Church Magazine
‘There are two mortgage documents which describe how Francis Matthews acquired the site of the
house (German 1841/6) and the adjacent land including the mills (German 1841/14). Both were
recorded in May 1841. There are no accompanying deed plans.
N&S Mortgages to 1847: German May 1841/6
In 1811, Norrris Moore passed a Bond and Security on lands and premises known as ‘Ballahown or
Glenmoar’, German, then in the tenancy of Louis Van Williamsdorff Richards, to Catherine and
Margaret Moore (his daughters) of Castletown for £200 (Manx pounds). After Margaret’s death,
her sister Catherine appointed Catherine Jeffcott as executrix. After Catherine Moore’s death,
Catherine Jeffcott sold the Bond and Security to Edward Gawne of Kentraugh, Rushen, for £171.8.11
(British pounds) on 13 February 1837. When Edward Gawne died, his son, Edward Moore Gawne
became his executor.
After Norris Moore's daughters died, his estate, still encumbered by this mortgage, passed to Emily
Eunice Corlett who was married to Francis Matthews Junior of Douglas. Francis Matthews then
undertook to pay off the mortgage which was signed off by Edward Moore Gawne on 22 February
1840, and proved at St Johns on 17" March 1840 before N Harrington.
N&S Mortgages to 1847: German May 1841/14
On 5" June 1829, James John Moore Esq,” Margaret Christian Moore and Catherine Moore passed
their deed of Bond and Security, or mortgage, on lands and premises situated in German and known
by the names of Glyn Moore (the Mills and the Park, and a meadow at Greeba, together with lands
in Santon known as Rogain-beg), to William Bridson of the Raggat Farm, Patrick
for £2000 Sterling.
William Bridson died intestate, and his estate passed to his widow, Ann, who assigned the Deed to
Edward Gawne of Kentraugh for £2000 Sterling. His son Edward Moore Gawne then assigned this
mortgage to the two Francis Matthews (pére et fils), co-partners as merchants trading as Francis
Matthews and Son. This deed was signed by Edward Moore Gawne on 8” March 1842, proved in
Douglas on 27" October 1842 and recorded the same month.
? Presumably a son of Norris Moore who would have been a minor at the time of the 1812 deed. This Norris
‘Moore is remembered in the name of Francis Matthews son, born in 1845.

FAMILY AND POLITICS
Francis Matthews Junior and his father co-owned a merchant business in Douglas* which had its
windows smashed in the copper riots in 1840. It is difficult from the records to fully separate them.
Pag 12
Francis Matthews (pére) (1788 -1845) HK 1838-1845 — merchant, married Alice Forbes of Oakhill ee
and Cronkbane. She was aunt (or sister?) to Professor Edward Forbes, the celebrated naturalist®,
Francis Matthews is usually listed as being a Douglas resident, but owned a substantial farm at
Oatlands, Santon, which was probably his principal residence (still in the family in 1866). By 1846,
the year after his death, his widow was living at 58 Athol Street, Douglas® later described as the site
of the Talbot public house (Matheson, 1963).
Francis Matthews (fils) (c1814°~ 1864) HK 1862-1864” - merchant, became a partner in his father’s
‘business in 1837, when he was twenty-three. He was residing at Ballahowin with his wife Emily and
two female house servants in 1841," the year he acquired Glenmoar. The census lists him as a
farmer with eighteen households under his control at Ballahowin (Appendix 1) including five
farmers, a miller, a blacksmith, a publican, a lead miner and a joiner. Some of these would have been
‘employees, others tenants. It would seem Ballahowin and Glyn Moore are the same place or
adjoining places.
The only information available about Francis Matthews and his family is that from newspaper entries
and other records of his activity as a member of the House of Keys (overleaf). He was elected to the
House of Keys in 1838, when he is referred to as being a resident of Douglas. The first reference toa
‘Matthews at Glyn Moore is in 1840, in the birth notices. As the 1841 census gives his address as
Ballahowin and does not list Glyn Moore, it can be assumed that they are the same place, and that
the name is interchangeable, as stated in one of the 1841 deeds of mortgage. There was a
Ballahowin farmhouse which was demolished when the mansion was built (a fragment remains) and
it would seem that the name Ballahowin was abandoned at that point and thereafter the mansion
house was named Glyn Moore/Glen Moar.
By 1851°, Francis Matthews is listed as beingat Glyn Moore. The old farmhouse was mostly
demolished, whilst most of the farm buildings remain today. Prior to this, there is a Matthews birth
notice dated 1840 at Glyn Moore. As this pre-dates the purchase of the mortgage, it is presumed to
relate to the old farmhouse. In April 1920, Francis Matthews’ daughters sold the house to John
Moore, who owned and operated Tynwald Mills and whose family owned the previous water-driven
mills at, first, Ballig Bridge, and then at the corn mill across the road (now Cornmill Cottage). The
present owner is a descendant of the Moores.
? 1836 (Quiggins Guide) Douglas ~ Merchants: Matthews, F. (Wine, Spirit and Tea) North Quay
1837 (Pigot’s Directory) Douglas ~ Merchants- Matthews Francis & Son, North Quay
“Manx Worthies, volume 3, Edward Forbes.
° Slater's Guide, 1846
“he was 37 in the 1851 census
7 The list of Tynwald members on the official website list both as one person, and does not pick up the start
date of the son's election to the Keys (giving 1862 as the second election), but references in the Manx Press
and other documents have him as HK in 1852, 1856, 1857 and 1858. http://www.tynwald.org.im/keys/1417-
alphabetical shtm!
* 1841 Census, German.
° 1851 Census, German,

Table 1: References to Francis Matthews
fils er pére
Page
| 13
85.1838 | Advertiser Editorial re the election ofF Matthews Esq of Douglas to the Keys.
6.7.1838 | Sun F Matthews Esq today took his seat in the House
75.1839 _| Advertiser John Moore Esq of Pulrose upon attaining his majority makes a
presentation to his uncle Francis Matthews to mark the latter's care of
him during his minority. Almost certainly the father.
49.1840 __| ManxSun ‘Mrs Frank Mathews, Giyn Moore. Births (twins?)
9.12.1843_[ ManxSun (Mr and Mrs Frank Mathews, Glenmore, German, birth of a daughter.
18.1.1845 | Manx Sun ‘Matthews, Mr and Mrs Frank, birth of a son (Norris Moore Matthews, died
1864, three months after his father)
324.1845 _| Manx Sun ‘Mathews, Frank, MHK, died aged 57. The father
1846 Slater's Directory _ | Farmers, Peel - Matthews Francis, Glynmoar
1848 ‘Matthews, Frank, Esq., Glynn Moore listed as subscriber to isle of Man
(Cumming 1848)
22.41.1848 | ManxSun Birth: on Tuesday the 14” instant, at Glynmoar the lady of Frank
Matthews, Esq, of a daughter. (Edith)
26.7.1856_| Manx Sun Female infant to wife of Frank Matthews,
HK, at Glynmore, birth 24” July.
1857 ‘Slater's Directory _| Gentry: Matthews Frank,.£sq. M.H.K. Glyn-moore
Farmers: Matthews Frank, Glyn-moore
1858 Manx Society ‘Matthews, Francis, H.K.; Giyn Moore, German. tn listing offounder
members.
23.2.1861_| ManxSun Death
at Giyn Moar of a daughter
of Frank Mathews,
age 7
1861 10M Family History | Christian Gawne was working as a cook and dairy maid on the farm of
Society Francis Matthews at Glyn Moar.
29.21.1862 | Manx Sun Death of Alicia Matthews, aged 75, widow of Francis Matthews of Douglas
at the residence of her son.
30.3.1864_| Manx Sun Death of Francis Matthews, at Giynmoar, St Johns
on 26° January 1864.
304.1864 | MS Death of Norris Moore Matthews, aged 19, youngest
son of late Francis
Matthews, MHK, at Giyn More on 28.4.1864
September | German Wills- | Francis Matthews of Giyn Moore and Emily Eunice Matthews otherwise
1864/5 | deed of revocation | Corlet, his wife sell to James Spittall, advocate, for 5 shillings, all
and new properties including Giyn Moore, provided that they have use of them and
appointments their rents during their lives, and thereafter they are rented out on max.
14 year leases at rack rate to provide an income of £25 per annum for
surviving children.
18.11.1865 | MS ‘Marriage of Emily Matthews, at St Johns, 14.11.1865, eldest daughter of
Francis Matthews of Glenmore, St Johns, to Rev WT Dunwoody
77.12.1867 | Manx Sun Death of Edith Matthews on 30" November, 2” daughter
of late Frank
Matthews, J, aged 19.
May German Memorial _| William Thomas Dinwoody and Emily Dinwoody (nee Matthews), his wife
1874/5 | of complaint = complainants, and Francis Oates Matthews (brother?) formerty of
Glenmoor but now of Oatlands, trustee under will of Francis Matthews of
Glyn Moore and Emily Eunice Matthews dated 23.12.1853, and under
deed of revocation and new appointments dated 26.1.1864
~ get paid £25,
from date of marriage, plus costs.
1882 Brown’s Directory _| Arthur Matthews, Farmer, Glenmoore (Arthur married Emma Swan
1883 ‘Smith’s Directory _ | Arthur Mathews, farmer, Ballakilly

The name
Ballahowin (Balinehowne) is listed as a quarterland in the Treen of Balladcyne in the Manorial Roll of
1703. The Ballahowin quarterland Is illustrated in Woods Atlas, below. This is shown split into four
areas
~ Glyn Moore is on parcel no. 62 which contains the cist beside Tynwald Hill. The others
parcels are 55, 58 and 60. Parcel SS is south of the road from St Johns to Tynwald Mills. It contains page | 44
the Fairfield, Tynwald Hill, the Processional Way and some (if not all) of the Millennium Gardens. The
site of the Chapel is identified as a small separate parcel, numbered 88. Parcels $8 and 60 are to the
south of the main Douglas Peel road as it passes through St Johns. All these sites make this a very
important quarterland.
Treen of Balladoyne.—Ballnehowne, 14.
Lord’s Composition Book of Charles, the &th Earl
of Derby, A.D. 1703.
Baliahowin has various spelling, evolving from the old Ballnehowne to the present Ballahowin. The
name continues in German
as a house name in St Johns.
Glyn is Welsh for valley or glen. As the patronymic Matthews with the double T is also usually Welsh,
itis logical to assume that the family
was originally Welsh, but the name Glyn Moar was in use
before the arrival of the Matthews.
° Moore is a common Manx family (and a previous owner was
Deemster Moore) hence Glen Moore, but over time, as the surname link is lost, it commonly gets
mis-transcribed as moar or mooar, the Manx for big or large.
Whilst Manx place-names are very persistent, their origins and attributes are soon forgotten. Each
time the name is transcribed, there is a risk that it will be spelt another way and these written
records are eventually given greater weight than they sometimes deserve. After some time, one or
other of these transcriptions assumes ascendancy and becomes entrenched in the written
documents. That has happened here. It is quite clear that the original name was either Glen Moore
or Glyn Moore.
The ‘glen’ is appropriate, the ‘big’ or ‘moar’ is not particularly relevant.
§ Shin
Wood's Atlas, German, with Ballahown outlined
in red in the lower left-hand
corner.
® advertisement in the Manx Advertiser, 18.6.1818: To be let - the estate of Glyn Moore of about 35 acres,
adjoining the Tynwald Hill. Apply Thos. A Corlett, or James John Moore, Advocates.

Page
| 15

walled garden which may predate the present house.
THE SITE
‘The site Is on good level valley bottom ground close to the Rhenass river.
The buildings around the
ford were part of the estate, as was Cornmill Cottage. The cornmill was the one in the 1841 ‘park
and mill’ mortgage. The road through the ford (Pat Clague’s Lane) appears
to be an ancient road. itis
very narrow and enclosed by high banks. Glen Mooar Loop Road post-dates Wood's Atlas
Page | 16

DESCRIPTION OF THE HOUSE
‘The plan and three elevations of the house are not symmetrical. The south-east facing porch front
has the three-storey gable, indicative of the principal rooms, to the left of the porch. The three large
principal rooms are ranged along the symmetrical south west elevation, with windows facingonto —_—Page | 17
the lawn. The former butler's pantry and the kitchen are to the right of the porch.
The small stuccoed porch has solid double doors with a Gothic fanlight above and black and white
marble tile laid in a chequer-board pattern. There are no side windows. The sandstone tablet above
the door is badly eroded.
‘The vestibule has inlaid (encaustic tiles) laid in the same decorative pattern with border as the main
hall, but the vestibule tiles are smaller. The inner and outer glazed screens to the vestibule are
framed by narrow columnettes which are typical of the late Georgian/Gothic Revival, apparently first
used in the Isle of Man by the Duke of Atholl’s architect, George Steuart, and copied or re-worked by
‘Thomas Brine in several buildings including Lorne House.
The stained glass is more Arts and Crafts in style and may have been fitted by the second owners,
the Moore’s.
‘The south-east facing porch front with gravel drive.

The sandstone tablet is very badly
eroded, but contains a shield topped
by a now headless bird, the head of a
‘cow or sheep, and three ships’ wheels
(probably signifying the merchant
fleet). The ribbon banner almost
certainly contained some text.
‘The vestibule outer door has a Gothic
fanlight. The damp wall is the result of
‘a bathroom leak in July 2010. The 4”
tiled fiooris the same pattern as in the
‘main hall. The slender columnettes
are a typical late Georgian/Gothic
revival feature, apparently first used
by the Duke of Atholl’s architect,
George Steuart, and copied by
‘Thomas Brine in several buildings
including Lorne House.
‘The stained glass is more Arts and
Crafts in style and may have been
fitted by the second owners, the
Moore's.

Page | 19
‘The inner vestibule door and sidelights with the slender columnettes stiffening
the frame elther side of the
sidelights. The stained glass is Victorian or Arts and Crafts, whilst the fanlight is more Georgian in style.
The vestibule opens into a tiled area the same width, then opens out inte a large hall, laid with
encaustic tiles (described on pages 18 to 21). This impressive space is further enhanced by the large
window lighting the stairs leading
to the right out of the rear
of the hall. There are doors off the hall
Jeading into the three principal rooms
to the left, the bathroom straight ahead and theformer
butler’s pantry to the right. The passage beside the stairs leads to the stairs to the basement, the
servants’ stairs, a store room and the kitchen.
The hall has a simple cornice, and deep architraves and skirtings.

‘The Gothic Revival stair
‘window: divided lights turn the
single pointed arch opening
into a double light separated
bya large quatrefoll at the
head. A band of six further
uatrefoils and mullions form
the lower section of the
window. The reveal is lined
and has a deep architrave,
‘The superficially simple
balusters have, on the lower
‘end, a double block separating
a tumed profile,
Black marble fireplace in the
sitting room.
Page
| 20

The dining room with
French windows in the
bay and a black marble
fireplace.
‘The drawing room has
French windows in the
bay facing north-west
and also has French
windows on the south-
west elevation,
The comice in the
drawing room has 2
distinctive
discontinuous
moulding, resembling
curtain poles with
decorative terminals.
Page | 21

The firs floor landing,
generously
proportioned and
well-lit from the
Gothic revival star
window.
‘The blue bedroom,
central on the south-
‘west elevation, has an
en-suite bathroom
and black marble
fireplace.
‘A number of the fireplaces appear to be made from Poyilvaish black limestone, sometimes referred to as
‘marble’. Most rooms appear litle altered, with only bathrooms and the kitchen containing ‘fifties or later
alterations.

‘Attic 1, The Gothic windows are the same in
all the four attics with windows. Two other
attics have fanlights. Access to the attics is
via the rear servants’ staircase.
‘The attics are unused and store a number of
disused household items, Their cobwebs are
much valued byfilm-makers and the owner
have asked that they not be disturbe
Virginia creeper dangles from the ceiling
Page
| 23,
Attic 2.

Basement 1
below the
sitting room.
The floor is.
stone-flagged.
Basement
below the
drawing room.
The old pipes
are from the
‘original coke-
fired boiler,
fuel for which
was stored in
the adjoining
cellar and
delivered from
an overhead
chute. These
‘two cellars
illustrated are
the only ones
with light-wells.

Inlaid tiles
Page
| 25
Hall, looking towards vestibule. The inlaid tiles may date from the 1840s. They are normally protected
under
carpets. The floor is entire and in excellent condition. The tea urn on the dresser wcs used in Tynwald Mills. The
vestibule screen has Georgian elements
(the proportion of the clerestory lights
and the columnettes (not visible
in this view) but the stained glass appears of a later date, probably Victorian or Edwardian. Note also the size
‘and depth
of the architraves
and skirtings.

‘The Hall of Glyn Moar contains an important large tiled floor using 6" (152 mm) inlaid and plain tiles
in exceptional condition. The vestibule is laid with the same tiles and pattern using 4 X “tiles. The
tiles are laid on the diagonal and are held within a border of special tiles. This necessitates the use
of
cut tiles inside the border. Apart from the border the tiles are all symmetrical. There are no
quartered tiles.
Whilst the date of this floor is not documented, it can be deduced to have been laid between 1845 P28* | 26
and 1855 and so was probably contemporaneous with the house (or laid within five years or so of
completion). Tiles of this date are usually 1” (25 mm) thick. Prior
to 1845, pavements of this type
tended not to contain plain tiles; after 1855, the smaller 4%” (108 mm) inlaid tiles were the norm. It
is almost certain that these tiles were made by Minton, rather than one of the other manufacturers
who followed with similar products.” It is possible that the designs used in the main floor appeared
in Minton’s first catalogue published in 1842.
‘The attribution could be confirmed by viewing the back of one of the tiles, but there is sufficient
other evidence that can be drawn from the finish, colour, size and pattern of these tiles atGlyn Moar
to identify Minton as the maker:
© three of the four inlaid tiles (ilustrations A, B and C, page 21) are identified as Minton
patterns (Beaulah and van Lemmen, 2TM ed 2001, pp 18, 38)
Minton did not glaze their tiles (or just glazed the inlay, as is the case with the blue jasper)
the blue ‘Jasper’ clay inlay was a Minton innovation, used mainly between c1844 and 1865
normally, attribution of one manufacturer's tile in a floor is sufficient to confirm the whole
floor
as being by the same maker,
‘Commonly known as encaustic tiles, these inlaid tiles are made by using a mould to impress a
pattern in the wet clay of a blank and then filling the voids with a contrasting colour of liquid slip,
Inlaid tiles of this type were made in the medieval period, but following the dissolution of the
monasteries, and the introduction of tin-glazed tiles from the continent, the making and use of
encaustic tiles ceased and the skill was lost until the mid-nineteenth century when A. W.N. Pugin,
Viollet-le-Duc and others began producing Gothic designs, especially for churches. Herbert Minton
collaborated with Pugin and began experimenting with the manufacture of these tiles, using a
process patented by Samuel Wright in 1830. Minton’s first catalogue was published in 1842, and
between that date and the 1860s, the use of inlaid tiles became widespread and by the end of the
Victorian era had become the norm for domestic hallways and paths. Minton personally donated
floor tiles to nearly two hundred churches and public buildings. The bias towards ecclesiastical use,
favoured by designer and maker, meant that the designs adopted were constrained by mid-
nineteenth century opinions as to what was an appropriate design to use in church — designs were
mainly floral, or derived from medieval stained glass and window tracery.
‘Main floor area
This floor is laid on the diagonal, with cut tiles completing the edge against the border. This floor
uses:
* The other principal manufacturers were Chamberlain of Worcester (first catalogue 1844, ceased production
1848) whose tiles were all glazed; Maw and Co. of Benthall, Shropshire who later moved to Jackfield, eventually
being absorbed into HR Johnson-Richards
Tiles Ltd of Stoke-on-Trent who are stil in production
{(voww.cravendunnil-iackfield.co.ukl; Godwin of Lugwardine, Herefordshire (1852, divided 1786 becoming
Godwin and Son in 1883 and Godwin and Hewett, 1884, both ceasing to manufacture encaustic tiles in 1906/7).

* Plain tiles in the main floor area, a square chocolate tile (6"/152 mm), triangular buff tiles
(short sides 6”/152 mm) and triangular terracotta tiles (short sides 4%”/108 mm)
* Inlaid tiles - two square symmetrical-pattern inlaid tiles, one rectangular linear-pattern border
tle and one square symmetrical-pattern border tile.
Tile A is a medieval tile design, illustrated by Parker (1840) with 2 Gothic design by Pugin, with fleurs-
de lys in the four corners and vine leaves in the centre set within a pattern reminiscent of stained
glass set in window tracery. This is a common design that was available in two or three colours.
Reproductions are available today.
Page | 27
Tile B was made by several factories (Minton, Maw, Godwin and Whetstone in the 6” size, and seven
factories in the 4” size), but the proportions of the elements varied slightly and in some the spot in
the outermost leaves is missing. The design has a fleur-de-lys above two downward drooping bell
flowers, not unlike bluebell florets.
Tile C is a linear border tile with vine leaves in buff and terracotta held between bands of simple
quatrefoil buff flowers set in a black background. This is a Minton design.
Tile D is a comer border tile with a floral centre contained by quatrefoils on a black ground. It has
not been seen in the literature, but it will be by Minton as part of their suite of border tiles.
Door thresholds
‘The two wide thresholds are also laid on a diagonal pattern with square terracotta tiles (4% “/108
mm) and smaller buff and black triangular tiles. These were probably added at a later date, and may
be from another maker
as the colours differ.
All the tile designs used in the hall can be seen at the corners of the room, where it is evident that the
proportions of the hall were not designed
to suit the tile pattern. The door threshold on the right uses smaller
plain tiles; the narrower threshold on the left is marked by a narrow strip of terracotta tiles.

Page
| 28
AA: a medieval design — fleurs-de-tys and vine leaves
The blue jasper inlay is glazed.
C: vine leaves and quatrefoils
The four inlaid tiles used in the hail
different proportions and details
Far left: No. 6039/6040
available in
two or three colours - proportions
are
not quite as elegant as the original.
Left: No, 4003 - available
in two
colours ~no dot in outermost
bud,
‘ond the bell floret is a different shope.

The garden and farm buildings
The gardens were formally laid
out but are now only lightly
maintained through grass cutting
and the original structure is
becoming obscured by rampant
growth. The beech trees are
claimed to be the largest on the
Isle of Man. It's possible that the
walled garden was built prior to
the house and was aligned with
the earlier farmhouse (with the
arched entrance being added
when the house was built)
The house seen from the formal
garden on the south-east.
Magnolia Wilsonii
Page | 29

Garlicined path to the Gothic
arch into the walled garden.
‘The long barn

Barn2
Page | 31
Barn 2 steps

RECOMMENDATIONS
Glyn Moore (or Glyn Moar) is recommended for addition to the Protected Buildings Register
for the
following reasons, as defined in Policy RB/1 — Registration of Buildings of Planning Policy Statement
1/01 - Policy and Guidance Notes for the Conservation of the Historic Environment of the Isle of
Man: Page | 32
© ARCHITECTURAL INTEREST AND/OR AESTHETIC QUALITY: The register is intended to include
buildings which are of importance to the Island for the interest of their architectural designs,
decoration, craftsmanship, or by virtue of the eminence of the architect; this would include
important examples of particular building types and techniques (e.g. buildings displaying
technological innovation or virtuosity, as might be found in structures connected with the
historic railways
of the Island) and significant plan forms;
Glyn Moar is @ fine example of an architecturally interesting and graciously proportioned mansion
house, with some distinctive features that place it in context with the development
of the mid-
nineteenth century Manx Gothic Revival style. Little documented, the house Is also significant for
being largely un-restored and un-modernised. The main Gothic Revival features are the stair window
‘and the single windows in the attic rooms, all with pointed arches. Of particular interest, is the tiled
floor through the vestibule and in the large hall is laid with a mix of plain and inlaid (encaustic) tiles,
believed to be by Minton. These tiles are in excellent condition, the floor is entire, and may be one
of the best examples of such tiles in the Isle of Man. The large garden is contemporary
with the
house and contains some rare shrubs and some of the largest beeches on the island.
‘+ HISTORIC INTEREST: This includes buildings which illustrate important aspects
of the Island's
social, economic, cultural, religious, agricultural, industrial or military history; thi
importance might also be assessed in the particular local context of the town or:
which the building is located;
ge in
Francis Matthews, the owner of Glyn Moar in the early 1840s and builder of Tynwald Mills, was
elected as a member
of the House of Keys in 1838. In April 1920, Francis Matthews’ daughters sold
the house to John Moore, who owned and operated Tynwald Mills and whose family owned the
previous water-driven mills at, first, Ballig Bridge, and then at the corn mill across the road (now
Cornmill Cottage). This is a significant aspect
of the industrial growth of this part of the Island which
has resulted in the addition of Tynwald Mills to the Protected Buildings Register.

REFERENCES AND SOURCES
ATTERBURY, P and C. Wainwright [Eds] (1994) Pugin: a Gothic passion. New Haven and London: Yale
University Press.
ATTERBURY, Paul [Ed](1995) A.W.N. Pugin; Master of Gothic Revival. London: Yale University Press. page | 33
BEULAH, K and Hans van Lemmen (2TM ed 2001) Church tiles of the Nineteenth Century. Princes
Risborough: Shire Publications Ltd.
GARRAD, LS., 2003, The Manx Garden (A History of Manx Gardens’ 1985, updated).
JONES, J (1993) Minton: the first two hundred. Shrewsbury: Swan Hill Press.
Matheson Neil (1963) Old Inns and Coffee-Houses of the Isle Of Man, prior ref. in IOMNHAS 1959.
http://www. Isle-Of-Man.Com/Manxni /lomnhas/V061p122,Htm
PARKER (3° ed 1840) Glossary of Architecture. First accurate illustrations of medieval tiles,
PEARSON, Lynn (2000) Minton tiles in the churches of Staffordshire. Tiles and Architectural Ceramics
Society.
MAPS
Contemporary maps courtesy of the Mapping Officer, Department of Infrastructure
Woods Atlas , 1867
Ordnance Survey, Edina digimap via University of Liverpool portal. Tile: 90009001, 1870
WEBSITES
i 's/1417-alphabetical.shtm!
[From Manx Quarterly #5, 1908] History of the Manx Police.
http://www.iomfhs.im/lawsons/LawsonBMD/manx law/v4/gawne.pdf The Gawne family.
Coakley, Frances,
ed. htto://www.isle-of-man.com/manxnotebook/famhist/goodwin,
reference to Emma Matthews (als Swan)
PHOTOGRAPHS
All by Patricia Tutt
24.05.2010
13.07.2010

Newspaper index 1793 — c 1854/Manx Sun announcements
Parish German
89.1810 Marx Advertiser grey horse for sale at Glenmore, near St Johns.
Frecsr sty Ma ‘To be let —The lands of Glen-moare, of about
30 acres, andof
Repeated until Ballachrink of 25 acres; both near St Johns and contiguous to
20611 ‘each other; new (adv) in the possession of L Van Wilmsdorff
Richards Esq, who resides at the former.
78181 oy Be let
- the dwelling-house of Glen-moore, near StJ, now inthe
Repeated until possession of L van Wilmsdorff Richards Esq., with about 30
n43812 acres of ground and an extensive garden. Apply Mr Richards,
Glen-moore.
mazisis | Wa To be sold by the Coroner, the household furniture etc. On the
premises at Glen-Moar, near StJ.
307 187 MA To be sold ~ hay at Glen Moore, nearSt J
1361818 WA To be let - the estate of Glyn Moore of about 35 acres,
Repeated i
Here ee sail ee Hill. Apply Thos. A Corlett, or James John
4A1822 MA (also sun) _| Died at Glyn Moore, Mrs Moore, relict of the late Deemster
Moore, March 30" 1822
1822 - Mr Norris Moore was High-Bailliff of Douglas
95.1822 MA To be let
~ the residence called Glynmoore, adjoining the
Tynwald Hill
73.4.1827 Sun Hay offered for sale at Glyn Moore, near St]
rep until
17.4,1827
22.1.1833 Sun To be let - the dwelling house Glen Moore, near Tynwald Hill,
rep until StJ, with about 35 acres of land. Apply mrClarke,
on the
72.1834 premises.
49.1827 Sun To be let -Glyn Moore, near Tynwald hill,StJ, now in the
rep until occupation of Mr Tupper. Apply JJ Moore Esq., Oatland.
14.10.1828
79.1.1833 Sun + Advertiser | To be sold, at Glenmoor, the residence of Robt Clarke Esq, near
rep until ‘St Johns. Furniture and farm stock etc.
19.2,1833
309.1834 | Advertiser Died at Glenmore, Robt Clarke Esq, aged 82.
24.10.1834 rep | Sun To be sold — furniture etc, the property of the late R Clarke Esq.
until At Glyn Moore, together with the leases of Glyn Moore,
31.20.1834 Knockaloe and Baldrine.
20.3.1835 rep | Sun To be let - the dwelling house etc called Glen Moar, near
vuntl47.11.1837 ‘Tynwald Hill, lately in the occupation of Robt Clarke Esq., decd.
9.42.1843 Manx Sun Mr and Mrs Frank Mathews, Glenmore, German, birth
of a
daughter.
31.7.1852 Manx Sun Death of Ellen Matthews, 24the July, at North Quay, Douglas,
wife of Edward Matthews of the yacht ‘Ada’ age 26
26.7.1856 MSun Female infant to wife of Frank Matthews, HK, at Glynmore,
birth 24" July.
23.2.1861 MS Death at Glyn Moar of a daughter
of Frank Mathews, age 7
??:29,11.1862 | Manx Sun Death of Alicia Matthews, aged 75, widow
of Francis Matthews
‘of Douglas at the residence of her son.
Page
| 34

301.1864
‘Manx Sun
Death of Francis Matthews, at Glynmoar, St Johns on 26
January 1864.
304.1864
MS
Death of Norris Moore Matthews, aged 19, youngest son of late
Francis Matthews, MHK, at Glyn More on 28.4.1864
18.11.1865
MS
Marriage of Emily Matthews, at St Johns, 14.11.1865, eldest
daughter of Francis Matthews of Glenmore, St Johns, to Rev WT
Dunwoody
712.1867
‘Manx Sun
Death of Edith Matthews on 30" November, 2 daughter of,
late Frank Matthews, JP, aged 19.
Page
| 35


stoLo90wd€°LuoyunBursnpeonpaigsBupesosd[IA19Jouono@sosd0}pealAewpue1yBudodumosDseBuLyU!UoHoNpa:da:pesyoUINeUT)
Upyjo9]‘TuoWuOAUSOMPUBJUEMIWIERDfeo07JoweuINEdeGyYBUAdoDMAID@
Abe
zToz saquiades Tz vive “Hus OISIAIG [0.13405 Buipying pue Buju pans
```
